
Like all ancient mythological traditions, in order to have a contextual understanding of ancient myth and the 
culture within which it evolved, one must look at the historical and archeological record, along with the 
extant textual and writing material, most of which comes down to us in fragmentary form.  Understanding 
the context within which a text or its fragments is found, from an archeological perspective, gives us a better 
understanding as to the role of the text, its purpose, and what type of variants or textual/manuscript 
tradition which the writing can be comprehended and best understood.  This is really the only method that 
can be used to attain a proper understanding of ancient "literature", especially when analyzing it in a 
translated/transliterated form.  This allows us to, at least as much as possible, to get a sense as to the cultural 
and sociological milieu surrounding the text and grasp as much as possible the history and the belief systems 
of the author.  
Archeologists have found cuneiform tablets from as early back as 3400 BC, roughly corresponding to the 
advent of civilization in Ancient Egypt, and the last known cuneiform tablet is from the latter part of the first 
century CE.  So this dead language, or script, was actually in use for around 4000 years and during that time 
was adapted to support the inscription of a variety of spoken languages, ranging from Akkadian  and Hittite 
tongues, to of course the better known Sumerian.  It is also a commonly held belief that cuneiform inspired 
several other alphabet systems that followed it, the Ugaritic and Old Persian alphabets for example.  
Cuneiform writing was gradually replaced by the Phoenician alphabet however, a precursor to the Greek 
alphabet system , and by the 2nd century CE, the script had become all but extinct.
Cuneiform was represented by wedge shaped markings, referring to the method and look of the markings as 
they were born out on the clay tablets that they were carved on, by stylus or pens of sorts which facilitated 
the script on the clay.   One of the reasons why so much of this writing has survived is the instrument that it 
was written on, i.e. the clay tablets.  A much more lasting and persistent archeological artifact than say 
papyrus, which was used by the Egyptians, or certainly silk which was commonly thought to have been used 
by the ancient Chinese.  The pen that was used to craft the characters, looked something like a chopstick with 
a sharp edge at the end to carve the characters and symbols onto the clay.  The wedge-shaped characters are 
where the name of the ancient script got its name in fact, wedge in Latin was cuneus.
 
Figure 6: Example of cuneiform script writing from the Achaemenid Empire (c 5th century BCE). 

The cuneiform script, was made up of a combination of logograms or ideograms, similar in kind to 
hieroglyphs in their more mature, Old and Middle Kingdom eras of ancient Egypt as well as similar to Old 
Chinese characters as they evolved in classical Chinese antiquity.  The characters or symbols are first and 
foremost picture based, betraying their origins as symbolic figures no doubt, and as the script developed, 
they came to represent whole words or ideas.  Phonetic characters, again like the more evolved form of 
hieroglyphs and ancient Chinese writing systems, were added to facilitate the representation of words or 
sounds in spoken languages that the respective writing systems were used to codify.  Alphabet systems like 
those of the ancient Phoenicians and Greeks were later developments.  With these building blocks, ancient 
Sumerians and Babylonians were able to express themselves in broad array of subjects: from mythology to 
personal narratives, to legal texts, and scientific works, and even correspondence and letters of sorts.
The Enûma Eliš is the best known and most commonly referred to text that represents this creation 
mythological narrative from the ancient Sumer-Babylonian people, a myth that gets its name after the first 
two words of the first clay tablet.  The text exists in various copies from ancient Babylon and Assyria and is 
believed to have been composed in the Bronze Age, roughly 18th to 16th centuries BCE, roughly 
corresponding to the early Assyrian Empire which is believed to have existed as an independent kingdom in 
the Mesopotamian region starting from roughly the middle of the third millennium BCE until it collapsed in 
the middle of the first millennium BCE.  It is during this time period that the myth and tablets are believed to 
have been created and transcribed.  Unlike the Egyptian cultural remnants which primarily come from burial 
formations - Coffins and Pyramids (hence the name of the primary textual sources of ancient Old Kingdom 
Egypt, i.e. the Pyramid Texts and Coffin Texts), from ancient Sumerian-Babylonian civilization, a culture and 
people that evolved around the Tigris-Euphrates Valley, there exist several versions of almost complete 
versions of their creation myths.  
The complete story was recorded on clay tablets and is around one thousand lines.  It was recorded in the 
Old Babylonian, or Akkadian language.  The text and the verses therein were associated with the Babylonian 
New Year festival, so there was a ritual use for the material as well as socio-political (Marduk being a 
Babylonian deity in origin), hence the various tablet findings that survive that give us a full textual tradition, 
at least as full as can be expected from that time period in antiquity. From this perspective, we clearly see 
strong parallels to the Egyptian cosmological narratives which were drawn up and affiliated with the reigns of 
various Egyptian kings throughout its long history, associated with various political capitals and temples of 
worship which existed therein as well as parallels with Old Testament stories, in particular the stories of 
creation and the Great Flood which are narrated in the first five books of the Old Testament, i.e. the Five 
Books of Moses.
The Enûma Eliš myth is the primary source of creation mythology of the ancient Sumer-Babylonians and 
represents a fairly mature rendering of creation mythology as well as reflecting a fairly consolidated socio-
political structure within which the myth, and its associated rituals and rites within which it was recited, are 
believed to have been performed.  Although a work of mythology and theological significant no doubt, the 
text and the context within which it was preserved shows a strong political influence as well, as it was clearly 
written (and copied) for the purpose of justifying the supremacy of the Babylonian God Marduk above all 
other Mesopotamian gods, no doubt to consolidate and affiliate the ruler/king of the Assyrian Empire to this 
ancient deity. 

The Enûma Eliš, or Enuma Elish, loosely translated into English as something like "when on high", a title given 
to it from the first few words of the text as was a common tradition in antiquity, begins with the following 
passage which describes the creation of the universe and the establishment of the structural elements and 
deities that they represented therein:

When in the height heaven was not named, 
And the earth beneath did not yet bear a name, 
And the primeval Apsû, who begat them, 
And chaos, Tiamat, the mother of them both 
Their waters were mingled together, 
And no field was formed, no marsh was to be seen; 
When of the gods none had been called into being, 
And none bore a name, and no destinies were ordained;  
Then were created the gods in the midst of heaven, 
Lahmu and Lahamu were called into being... 
Ages increased,... 
Then Ansar and Kisar were created, and over them.... 
Long were the days, then there came forth..... 
Anu, their son,... 
Ansar and Anu... 
And the god Anu... 
Nudimmud, whom his fathers, his begetters..... 
Abounding in all wisdom,...' 
He was exceeding strong... 
He had no rival - 
Thus were established and were... the great gods. 

In the beginning, we have the existence of a primordial watery abyss, of which two basic male and female 
correspondent and coexistent deified principals are called out - Apsû and Tiamat respectively.  The first 
representing the ordered or structured aspect, the seed, and the latter representing the more chaotic and 
destructive (female) aspect.  These two primary entities or forces become the source from which all the other 
major gods and goddesses emanate, and from which the earth, sky, sun, moon and stars are created, again 
similar to the narrative from the other contemporary mythologies we find in the Mediterranean.  
This initial primordial substance, described as a "watery abyss" and "chaotic" in the Sumer-Babylonian 
mythos, or that which lacks order and justice in the various creation mythologies in the Mediterranean region 
in antiquity, starts as initially "disordered" and ungerminated.  Then via the act, or in some traditions via the 
spoken word or thought, of the first principal or being/deity the ordered cosmos starts to unfold and the first 
generation of gods representing the basic forces of nature is born.  At the very beginning of the story of 
creation then, we see the existence of two primordial forces - one male and one female - from which the 
universe and the deities are begotten.  You have this unformulated ocean like substance deity who bears all 
pantheon of gods and goddesses, Tiamat, a female goddess associated with the ocean or salt water, and then 
the progenitor male deity, Apsû , Akkadian the god who presides over fresh water, which was believed by 
the ancient Sumer-Babylonians, not surprisingly, to represent the spring and source of life.
These respective primordial male and female gods or entities then exist prior to, and must in fact come 
together, before the sky and earth, the material and heavenly realms, can come into existence.  Then Lahmu 
and Lahamu are created ("slime" or "mud" and "silt" or "salt", male and female respectively), alluding to the 
establishment of the primary elements of creation upon which the universe and the later deities in the 
Sumer-Babylonian pantheon can come forth.  Ansar and Kisar are then created, "heaven" (male) and the 
"whole earth" (male) or perhaps better understood as "material universe".  Then comes Anu, a male deity 
representing the sky (as distinct from 'heaven', represented by his father Ansar) and then Nudimmud, or the 
"image fashioner" come into being.  Thus is established the Sumer-Babylonian pantheon of gods who preside 
over creation before the lesser gods are born, of which of course Marduk plays a central role.   
The Enûma Eliš then relays in graphic detail the story of the struggle between the begetter gods of Apsû and 
Tiamat and their offspring, a struggle which culminates in the destruction of the powers and followers of 
Tiamat - led by her offspring Kingu - which are ultimately defeated by Marduk, the son of Ea (Enki) and 
Damkina, the great Mother goddess of Sumer-Babylonian mythos.

Then advanced Tiamat and Marduk, the counselor of the gods; 
To the fight they came on, to the battle they drew nigh. 
The lord spread out his net and caught her, 
And the evil wind that was behind him he let loose in her face. 
As Tiamat opened her mouth to its full extent, 
He drove in the evil wind, while as yet she had not shut her lips. 
The terrible winds filled her belly, 
And her courage was taken from her, and her mouth she opened wide. 
He seized the spear and burst her belly, 
He severed her inward parts, he pierced her heart. 
He overcame her and cut off her life; 
He cast down her body and stood upon it. 
When he had slain Tiamat, the leader, 
Her might was broken, her host was scattered. 
And the gods her helpers, who marched by her side, 
Trembled, and were afraid, and turned back. 
They took to flight to save their lives; 
But they were surrounded, so that they could not escape. 
He took them captive, he broke their weapons; 
In the net they were caught and in the snare they sat down. 
The ... of the world they filled with cries of grief. 
They received punishment from him, they were held in bondage. 
And on the eleven creatures which she had filled with the power of striking terror, 
Upon the troop of devils, who marched at her..., 
He brought affliction, their strength he...; 
Them and their opposition he trampled under his feet. 
Moreover, Kingu, who had been exalted over them, 
He conquered, and with the god Dug-ga he counted him. 
He took from him the Tablets of Destiny that were not rightly his, 
He sealed them with a seal and in his own breast he laid them. 

After a rebellion and betrayal in the midst of the primordial gods, the first generation of gods and goddesses 
and their offspring, led by Tiamat and her son Kingu, Marduk assumes dominion over the world of immortal 
gods.  The story is not only reminiscent of the battle between Zeus and the Titans, also the progeny of the 
first generation of gods which plays such a prominent role in the Theogony of Hesiod, but also the battle 
fought between Osiris and Set from which Horus - the Egyptian counterpart to the Sumer-Babylonian Marduk 
and the Greek Zeus - establishes himself as the ruler of the pantheon from ancient Egypt.  
Much like Ma'at of the Egyptians, and the Greek Hermes, Marduk is accredited not only with the 
establishment of order and justice in the realm of the divine, but also with the establishment of the final 
order of the material universe and the world of man - creating the stars in the heavens, the zodiac and the 
precessions of the seasons, as well as the calendar to measure time which included in the Sumer-Babylonian 
tradition the 12 months of the year, and the Sun and Moon to govern time. 

He (Marduk) made the stations for the great gods; 
The stars, their images, as the stars of the Zodiac, he fixed. 
He ordained the year and into sections he divided it; 
For the twelve months he fixed three stars. 
After he had ... the days of the year ... images, 
He founded the station of Nibir [the planet Jupiter] to determine their bounds; 
That none might err or go astray, 
He set the station of Bel and Ea along with him. 
He opened great gates on both sides, 
He made strong the bolt on the left and on the right. 
In the midst thereof he fixed the zenith; 
The Moon-god he caused to shine forth, the night he entrusted to him. 
He appointed him, a being of the night, to determine the days; 
Every month without ceasing with the crown he covered him, saying: 
"At the beginning of the month, when thou shinest upon the land, 
Thou commandest the horns to determine six days, 
And on the seventh day to divide the crown.. .

So while the theogony related in the Enûma Eliš represents a distinctive tale and has very specific Sumer-
Babylonian characteristics, we nonetheless find very common motifs therein which align Sumer-Babylonian 
mythos, as we see it in the Enûma Eliš, with other creation mythos in antiquity, especially from in and around 
the Mediterranean - most notably the Hebrew narrative we find in Genesis, Hellenic theogony in Hesiod's 
rendition of world creation, as well as the creation mythos we find in ancient Egypt as well.  
This universal order as the ancients understood it was reflected, and anthropomorphized, in this initial 
pantheon of gods that were created as part of the establishment of the cosmos at the beginning of Time, 
with the most primordial of beings coming forth first and then the lesser, or more shaped or well-formed 
aspects of creation coming afterwards, with ultimately all of the  different aspects of nature - Earth, Air, 
Water, Sky, Sun, Moon, etc. - being brought forth as it were and then ultimately a king or ruler of the gods 
being crowned at the end  Mankind, the "prototypical man" as it were, is typically shaped or crafted through 
clay or by some other means at the end of these theogonies, such as we see in Genesis for example with 
Adam.  These theogonies - or cosmogonies as we refer to them sometimes which carries with it more 
philosophical, or metaphysical connotations - establish not only the socio and cultural specific narrative (what 
we have come to understand and refer to as "myth") as to how the world came into being, but also the basic, 
and fundamentally divine, structure of their world through which not only the cycle of Time is established as 
it is measured by Day, Night, the Moon and Stars, but also the basic theological framework and deities who 
could, and most certainly should, be worshipped in their various forms and specific attributes via various rites 
and rituals so that their world could be preserved and maintained.  
These creation tales, i.e. our mythos - and again this is common throughout antiquity in the cultures and 
civilizations through Eurasia, Sumer-Babylon being no exception - typically end in the overthrow of some 
vicious tyrant god by a benevolent child of the second or third generation deities who establishes order and 
justice throughout the world of immortals, the beings who are co-emergent with creation itself and who 
dwell in the Heavens amidst the Stars and in the Sky.  This leader of the gods then, the Sumer-Babylonian 
Marduk or the Hellenic Zeus serve as prime examples, not only establishes and keeps order in the Heavens, 
but also is the divine being who is responsible for, and whose worship and fealty in turn provides the basis for 
harmony and balance, and preservation really, in the world of man as well - to keep the society safe and 
flourishing and to protect it from the onslaught of neighbors or attack which was invariably a concern for 
almost all ancient peoples in one form or another.  The king or ruler of each of these ancient societies usually 
claimed his power and legitimacy through this leader of the divine immortal pantheon of gods, either 
through direct descent or through some other means of divine heritage, aligning and legitimizing their rule 
with the universal cosmic order as it were, providing the basis for the divinity of these rulers and kings as 
well, who in many cases were also worshipped as gods, the Egyptian pharaohs perhaps being the best 
example.
The mythos of the Sumer-Babylonian civilization that centered around the Tigris-Euphrates Valley was no 
different, with primordial the Apsû and Tiamat providing the basis from which the universe comes into being, 
corresponding more or less with the Nu and Naunet of the Egyptians and from which Marduk comes forth as 
the ultimate leader of the gods who through various acts of miraculous heroism comes to be king of the gods 
and as such ultimately responsible for the well-being of the Sumer-Babylonian people who were in his charge 
so to speak.  This creation narrative that we find in the Enûma Eliš, is essentially the same in structure and 
form that we find in the Hellenic rendition as told by Hesiod, as well as the Indian/Hindu rendition as well as 
we find in the Vedas and the Purāṇas, with a few local variations of course.  
We also find in the Sumer-Babylonian tradition the creation of anthropomorphic deities, the second 
generation of gods, which establish and keep order and justice in the universe, a concept that we see in 
virtually all of the mythos from antiquity throughout Eurasia in fact.  Furthermore, in each of these ancient 
creation narratives with again the Sumer-Babylonia tradition being no exception, these anthropomorphic 
deities emerge out of a watery and abysmal chaotic void or abyss, through which ultimately the universe is 
shaped and ordered, with these deities being co-emergent with it and at the same time responsible for its 
preservation as well.  One can also clearly see a consistent socio-political purpose behind the creation myths 
of the Egyptians and Sumerians, the need to establish the preeminence of the one ruler of society as 
manifest in one chieftain or ruler whose authority is established via the primary deity of the people.  Ancient 
cultures were certainly marked by a priesthood class that was legitimized by the ruler of the people which in 
turn rested upon the common mythology from which authority was established and divined - hence the 
worship of these ancient kings and pharaohs as divine.  
It's fair to say that both the ancient Egyptian and Sumer-Babylonian mythological traditions - and to a lesser 
extent the mythology of the Hebrews - speak of and hold great reverence for the deity or principal who 
establishes and maintains order in the world, for which the king or leader of the respective peoples is held 
ultimately responsible and from which their authority is established.  The Greco-Roman and Hebrew 
mythological traditions as reflected in the works of Hesiod, Ovid and Moses, all which evolved in the roughly 
the same geographic region, were clearly influenced by their Sumer-Babylonian and Egyptian predecessors 
and carried very similar narratives and motifs albeit in different terms with different deities and in different 
languages (both spoken and written).
One of the most prominent features of ancient society is the connection between the ruling class (kings and 
priests) and the respective mythos of said society - what scholars refer to as "civilization".  In these ancient 
socio-political structures, again these civilizations, socio-political structures that were defined more or less by 
their language and their "culture", there exists a very strong correlation, a dependence really, between the 
authority of the ruling class - kings, aristocrats and priests - and their respective mythos.  For it is through 
the myths themselves, and their associative rituals, rites and festivals which were intimately and intrinsically 
tied to said myths, that not only bound the people together - provided the cultural foundations as it were - 
but also provided the legitimacy of the ruling class.  
For the ruling class, the pharaohs and emperors were considered to be of divine heritage, tracing their 
lineage back through the mythos to the presider over the universe himself, i.e. God, or Marduk in the case of 
the Sumer-Babylonians.  In the cosmic, universal sphere, it was God who held dominion, who through his 
power provided order and support, and balance and harmony (as juxtaposed from the primordial chaos from 
which the ordered universe emerged), to the previously disordered and chaotic universe.  In the human 
sphere, reflected in the socio-political structures of these ancient societies, it was the king or emperor that 
provided order, balance and harmony for their respective people, using the powers that had been granted to 
him from his (or her) lineage, from the gods themselves, through the rites and rituals presided over by the 
priests, the messengers of the divine.  
It is this picture that essentially describes the relationship between the ruling class and the divine for almost 
all of the ancient civilizations that we see emerge in and around the Mediterranean, and to the East in Asia 
Minor and Persia, in antiquity from the 4th to the 1st millennia BCE, up until the Christian Era really - where 
power and political authority in particular was understood, legitimized and justified through the lens of the 
respective cultural mythos of said civilization, an intellectual framework which, in today's terminology, 
provided the underlying theological framework of said (ancient) culture.  And certainly the Sumer-
Babylonians, whose mythos, and cosmogony, is captured so eloquently in the epic tale we know as the 
Enûma Eliš, we can see a very good example of this, where the cosmogony dovetails into the foundation of 
society quite clearly, providing the shared mythos to support the Sumer-Babylonian civilization itself.