
One of the nice things that you found as you studied more advanced civilizations, as you got further into the 
first millennium BCE, you had better material and source texts to work with.  You no longer had to rely on 
texts and tablets that described ancient rituals for specific temples, or documents or inscriptions associated 
with royal burial grounds, you actually had books or treatises that were authored and compiled by a single 
individual that had coherent narratives and compiled and consolidated all the various traditions that might 
be represented throughout that particular culture.  One of the other nice things as you moved into the study 
of the civilizations of the Greeks and the Romans is you started to see pretty good one to one 
representations of their words into modern day English given its more direct relationship to the Latin.  
Prior to looking at the mythological creation narratives that were prevalent in classical Greece, it's worth 
pointing out some of the terminology that we use today that originated with the Greek language, the Greek 
poets and philosophers, that has come down to us in English, through the Latin translations, that we use to 
describe these intellectual traditions.  The words theogony and cosmogony specifically actually both come 
from their Greek counterparts which in English have very similar meanings but in the Greek have different 
definitions, definitions that are symbolic of the intellectual tradition which each in turn belonged.  Theogony, 
or thæogonía (θεογονία) means the study of the origin and genealogy of the gods whereas cosmogony, or 
kozmogonía (κοσμογονία) denotes the study of the origins of the universe, the latter term coming into use as 
the philosophical tradition arose, kosmos first being attributed to Pythagoras in fact circa 5th century BCE.  
Theogony signifying, as in the case with Hesiod for example, the mythological narrative that described the 
creation of the gods of the pantheon and their successors.

While thæogonía (theogony; Gr. θεογονία) is the origin and genealogy of the Gods, kozmogonía (cosmogony; 
Gr. κοσμογονία) is the origin of the universe. In Hellenic polytheistic religion, these two terms are closely related 
and cannot actually be entirely separated, for the phenomenal universe is itself divine and the personal deities 
are intimately connected with its origin and both emerge simultaneously.

The etymology of thæogonía is Θεοί (Gods) + γέννα (birth), hence, the birth or origin of the Gods.  The 
etymology of kozmogonía is kόσμος (order, to put in order) + γέννα (birth); the word kόσμος only later came to 
mean the entire universe, but its original meaning has some bearing on how we understand our world, as the 
view of Orphismós sees the birth or origin of the kózmos (cosmos; Gr. κόσμος) as having a form and order, what 
Pythagóras (Gr. Πυθαγόρας) called diakózmisis (diakosmesis; Gr. διακόσμησις), the orderly arrangement of the 
universe. 

Having clarified this subtle but important distinction, in particular as we look at this time period of ancient 
Greece where philosophy begins to take precedence over mythology - Logos over mythos - the analysis and 
study of the theogonies of Hesiod and the one attributed to the pseudo-historical figure of Orpheus actually 
shed much light on the transition, or at least the precursors to the transition which start with Pythagoras and 
Plato and come to a more solid, rational, foundation with Aristotle.  To the Greeks, and in particular the 
tradition associated with Hesiod, it is Chaos that was the arche, or underlying origin, of the universe.  
Arche means 'beginning', 'origin' or 'first cause' and 'power' in Greek.  It can also denote 'ultimate underlying 
substance' or 'ultimate indemonstrable principle' at least as seen in the context of Greek cosmogony in 
general.  Later philosophers such as Aristotle expanded upon the meaning of arche as the element or 
principle of a thing, which although indemonstrable and intangible in and of itself, provides the conditions of 
the possibility of the existence of such a thing. 
In the Greco-Roman tradition, particularly in the works of the Neo-Platonists and other historians of 
philosophy from Cicero to Diogenes Laertius to Plutarch and others, it was the first principles of things that 
were the topic of the early Greek classical authors such as Hesiod and in turn Orpheus, who was the 
attributed author of various hymns and poems devoted to the gods that spoke of an alternative theogony, 
through which later philosophers viewed and interpreted these first principles and through which these later 
authors juxtaposed and defended the Hellenic philosophical tradition in the face of impending Christianity 
which took over the theological beliefs of the Mediterranean and Near Eastern peoples a few centuries after 
the birth of Christianity and its adoption by the Roman Empire by Constantine.
In modern times, the arche is the root of the term used by Carl Jung to describe the underlying psychological 
themes he found present in individual's unconscious mind through his psychological practices.  To Jung these 
basic symbols and images that he found present in the modern mind bore striking similarity to primitive 
mythological motifs, motifs that are found in virtually all of the mythological traditions that we are studying 
and analyzing within the context of this work.  Jung called these symbols archetypes, the commonality of 
which across many of his patients he used as the rationalization for the existence of what he called the 
collective unconscious, the same principle which Joseph Campbell indirectly leveraged to explain the 
commonality of mythical themes and stories across all pre-civilized man across the globe - as presented in his 
Hero with a  Thousand Faces for example.  In essence, this notion of arche to the Greeks represented the 
establishment of the basic universal building blocks, the first principles of abstract thought and ideas, upon 
which was superimposed Greek theogony as it was formulated in order to establish a more rational basis 
upon which the cosmological world order was maintained and was to be understood.  This transition is 
typically referred to in the academic literature as Logos over mythos but we can view it here within the 
context of theogony to cosmogony.

The orthodox version of creation mythology from classical Greece is from a poetic work attributed to Hesiod 
called the Theogony.  Compilation of the text is dated to somewhere between the 8th and 6th centuries BCE, 
somewhat contemporaneous to Homer, and representative of the height of literature to the Greeks even by 
the classical philosophers such as Plato, Aristotle among others that followed in their footsteps.  The 
Theogony, or again literally "the birth of the gods", describes the origins and genealogies of the gods of the 
ancient Greek pantheon.  Hesiod markedly begins his work with an attribute to the divine Muses, the great 
daughters of Zeus who in the Hellenic world were the masters of mystery and the keepers of the divine 
mysteries through which any true knowledge or truth could be known.  It is through the Muses themselves 
that Hesiod relates his tale, speaking directly to their source through which his tale, his Theogony, is related 
and written.

(ll. 1-25) From the Heliconian Muses let us begin to sing, who hold the great and holy mount of Helicon, and 
dance on soft feet about the deep-blue spring and the altar of the almighty son of Cronos, and, when they have 
washed their tender bodies in Permessus or in the Horse's Spring or Olmeius, make their fair, lovely dances 
upon highest Helicon and move with vigorous feet. Thence they arise and go abroad by night, veiled in thick 
mist, and utter their song with lovely voice, praising Zeus the aegis- holder and queenly Hera of Argos who 
walks on golden sandals and the daughter of Zeus the aegis-holder bright-eyed Athene, and Phoebus Apollo, 
and Artemis who delights in arrows, and Poseidon the earth-holder who shakes the earth, and reverend Themis 
and quick-glancing (1) Aphrodite, and Hebe with the crown of gold, and fair Dione, Leto, Iapetus, and Cronos 
the crafty counsellor, Eos and great Helius and bright Selene, Earth too, and great Oceanus, and dark Night, 
and the holy race of all the other deathless ones that are for ever. And one day they taught Hesiod glorious 
song while he was shepherding his lambs under holy Helicon, and this word first the goddesses said to me -- the 
Muses of Olympus, daughters of Zeus who holds the aegis:

(ll. 26-28) `Shepherds of the wilderness, wretched things of shame, mere bellies, we know how to speak many 
false things as though they were true; but we know, when we will, to utter true things.'

(ll. 29-35) So said the ready-voiced daughters of great Zeus, and they plucked and gave me a rod, a shoot of 
sturdy laurel, a marvellous thing, and breathed into me a divine voice to celebrate things that shall be and 
things there were aforetime; and they bade me sing of the race of the blessed gods that are eternally, but ever 
to sing of themselves both first and last. But why all this about oak or stone? (2) 

We see here not just the invocation to the Muses, in fact the allusion to the very source of the material being 
the Muses themselves who speak through Hesiod, but also the purpose of the work as explaining the 
existence of the Greek gods and goddesses that we know all too well even from modern renditions of Greek 
mythology - reference to Zeus and Hera, Apollo and Athena, Poseidon and Aphrodite, and even Chronos, the 
older parent of the Greek pantheon who is to play such an important role in the Theogonic tale that Hesiod is 
to tell.  
A few verses later Hesiod provides us with his account of the first initial principles or gods from which the 
pantheon emerges from, the initial cosmological account of creation as it were.  The reference to the first 
beings that were ever created from which the pantheon of Greek gods originated and from which his story of 
rulership, succession, betrayal and the ultimate establishment of order is unfolded.  In Hesiod's account of 
the creation of the universe, the initial state of the universe is Chaos, or Khaos in the Greek, and from this 
initial state of disorder, from which the word still carries the same meaning even in modern English today, 
the universe comes to life and order begins to manifest.  

Verily at the first Chaos came to be, but next wide-bosomed Earth, the ever-sure foundations of all the 
deathless ones who hold the peaks of snowy Olympus, and dim Tartarus in the depth of the wide-pathed Earth, 
and Eros (Love), fairest among the deathless gods, who unnerves the limbs and overcomes the mind and wise 
counsels of all gods and all men within them. From Chaos came forth Erebus and black Night; but of Night were 
born Aether and Day, whom she conceived and bare from union in love with Erebus. And Earth first bare starry 
Heaven, equal to herself, to cover her on every side, and to be an ever-sure abiding-place for the blessed gods. 
And she brought forth long Hills, graceful haunts of the goddess-Nymphs who dwell amongst the glens of the 
hills. She bare also the fruitless deep with his raging swell, Pontus, without sweet union of love. But afterwards 
she lay with Heaven and bare deep-swirling Oceanus, Coeus and Crius and Hyperion and Iapetus, Theia and 
Rhea, Themis and Mnemosyne and gold-crowned Phoebe and lovely Tethys. After them was born Cronos the 
wily, youngest and most terrible of her children, and he hated his lusty sire. 


So here in the work of Hesiod lie the beginnings of some of the basic principles, or framework at least, from 
the transition from theogony to cosmogony, the primordial arche as it were upon which the Greek pantheon 
emerges.  We are presented at the beginning of the genealogy with the notion of Chaos, or disorder as the 
term is still used today, that represents the primordial substance that forms the basis of all creation.  In 
Hesiod's account Chaos is a pseudo-anthropomorphic being, a being that although not anthropomorphic per 
se, i.e. it is without gender or form, and yet it is the primordial substance from which the primary first 
generation deities and their offspring come forth from.  According to Hesiod out of Chaos emerge Gaia 
(Earth) and Tartarus - Mother Earth and the Underworld respectively, the great pillars of the world of being 
inhabited by human souls.  And then, perhaps surprisingly, in this tradition Eros, or Love, is a primary force 
which then acts to create the rest of the first generation of gods and goddesses and from which the realms of 
Heaven and Earth and all the basic natural principles and their anthropomorphic counterparts are created 
and established.
Next in Hesiod's Theogony, also out of Chaos came Erebus , representing darkness or shadow, as well as 
Nyx, or the Greek's personification of Night.  Erebus and Nyx then reproduced to form Aether, and Hemera 
(day).  Then came Gaia who gave birth to Uranus (sky/heaven), and Ourea (mountains) and Pontus (sea).  
Uranus then fertilized Gaia and from this union the great Titans are born and the next generation of gods are 
born, the greatest of which is Chronos and from which the tale of the next generation of gods and the 
overthrow of Chaos by Chronos, order is established chaos as it were, is told.  These characters, these 
entities, represented the first and foremost parts of creation that sprung forth from the "void", the first 
generation of gods for the Greeks.  Although the principles or deities themselves were different, there were 
some parallels to the genealogy of the Egyptians and Mesopotamian story lines albeit the ordering and gods 
themselves were different for each of the civilizations, perhaps indicative of the different aspects of each of 
the respective cultures.  Here we can find in this subsequent generation of gods, much like the Egyptian 
creation mythology, the generation and establishment of the world order, the pieces of the puzzle were laid 
down as it were, creating the foundations upon which mankind could emerge and flourish.
Hesiod then goes on to tell the tale of the overthrow of the evil ruler Chaos by Chronos, the greatest of the 
first generation of gods at the behest of his mother Gaia, Mother Earth.  Herein we find the great mythical 
narrative of the manifestation and establishment of order upon chaos, a tale that is gruesome and graphic no 
doubt in its details, and speaks to a consistent tradition of castration of the first principles of creation upon 
which the second generation of order is established.

(ll. 167-169) So she said; but fear seized them all, and none of them uttered a word. But great Cronos the wily 
took courage and answered his dear mother:
(ll. 170-172) `Mother, I will undertake to do this deed, for I reverence not our father of evil name, for he first 
thought of doing shameful things.'
(ll. 173-175) So he said: and vast Earth rejoiced greatly in spirit, and set and hid him in an ambush, and put in 
his hands a jagged sickle, and revealed to him the whole plot.
(ll. 176-206) And Heaven came, bringing on night and longing for love, and he lay about Earth spreading 
himself full upon her (7).
Then the son from his ambush stretched forth his left hand and in his right took the great long sickle with 
jagged teeth, and swiftly lopped off his own father's members and cast them away to fall behind him. And not 
vainly did they fall from his hand; for all the bloody drops that gushed forth Earth received, and as the seasons 
moved round she bare the strong Erinyes and the great Giants with gleaming armour, holding long spears in 
their hands and the Nymphs whom they call Meliae (8) all over the boundless earth. And so soon as he had cut 
off the members with flint and cast them from the land into the surging sea, they were swept away over the 
main a long time: and a white foam spread around them from the immortal flesh, and in it there grew a 
maiden. First she drew near holy Cythera, and from there, afterwards, she came to sea-girt Cyprus, and came 
forth an awful and lovely goddess, and grass grew up about her beneath her shapely feet. Her gods and men 
call Aphrodite, and the foam-born goddess and rich-crowned Cytherea, because she grew amid the foam, and 
Cytherea because she reached Cythera, and Cyprogenes because she was born in billowy Cyprus, and 
Philommedes (9) because sprang from the members. And with her went Eros, and comely Desire followed her 
at her birth at the first and as she went into the assembly of the gods. This honour she has from the beginning, 
and this is the portion allotted to her amongst men and undying gods, -- the whisperings of maidens and smiles 
and deceits with sweet delight and love and graciousness. 


From the seed of the of Chaos then, intermingled and spread about across the earth and sea and land, the 
other great first primordial creative principles of the first generation of gods, the second generation of deities 
comes forth as Chronos takes the reins of power from his father and bears children with Rhea, his sister.  But 
the graphic tale of deceit and disorder continues though, and with this next generation of gods we finally 
come to the great Zeus, the god of Thunder and Lightning who finally restores balance and order not only to 
the immortals but to the world of man as well.
As the tale is told Chronos knew he was to be overthrown by one of his seed and therefore after Rhea bore 
each child, Chronos swallowed them whole to ensure that his reign would last forever.  But Rhea outwitted 
her spouse and when Zeus was born she hid him from his father in a deep and secret cave, replacing him with 
a stone and outwitting him in order to fulfill the prophecy and no doubt so that her children could be reborn 
and live.  In a story that bears much resemblance to the pantheonic struggles so well documented in Egypt 
between Osiris and Set, who is overthrown by the progeny of Isis and Osiris, namely Horus), Hesiod tells us 
that Chronos is convinced by Gaia to overthrow his father Uranus and claim authority over the gods.  He did 
this successfully (in particularly gruesome fashion as it were) and then wedded his sister Rhea after which 
Rhea and Chronos in turn birthed Hestia, Demeter, Hera, Hades, Poseidon, and Zeus, finishing the major 
Olympiad as it were.  After a long struggle steeped in myth and graphic tales of mischief and brutality, Zeus 
ends up taking over Olympus and control over the Greek pantheon from Cronos.  


(ll. 453-491) But Rhea was subject in love to Cronos and bare splendid children, Hestia (18), Demeter, and gold-
shod Hera and strong Hades, pitiless in heart, who dwells under the earth, and the loud-crashing Earth-Shaker, 
and wise Zeus, father of gods and men, by whose thunder the wide earth is shaken. These great Cronos 
swallowed as each came forth from the womb to his mother's knees with this intent, that no other of the proud 
sons of Heaven should hold the kingly office amongst the deathless gods. For he learned from Earth and starry 
Heaven that he was destined to be overcome by his own son, strong though he was, through the contriving of 
great Zeus (19). Therefore he kept no blind outlook, but watched and swallowed down his children: and 
unceasing grief seized Rhea. But when she was about to bear Zeus, the father of gods and men, then she 
besought her own dear parents, Earth and starry Heaven, to devise some plan with her that the birth of her 
dear child might be concealed, and that retribution might overtake great, crafty Cronos for his own father and 
also for the children whom he had swallowed down. And they readily heard and obeyed their dear daughter, 
and told her all that was destined to happen touching Cronos the king and his stout-hearted son. So they sent 
her to Lyetus, to the rich land of Crete, when she was ready to bear great Zeus, the youngest of her children. 
Him did vast Earth receive from Rhea in wide Crete to nourish and to bring up. Thither came Earth carrying him 
swiftly through the black night to Lyctus first, and took him in her arms and hid him in a remote cave beneath 
the secret places of the holy earth on thick-wooded Mount Aegeum; but to the mightily ruling son of Heaven, 
the earlier king of the gods, she gave a great stone wrapped in swaddling clothes. Then he took it in his hands 
and thrust it down into his belly: wretch! he knew not in his heart that in place of the stone his son was left 
behind, unconquered and untroubled, and that he was soon to overcome him by force and might and drive him 
from his honours, himself to reign over the deathless gods. 


Zeus then revives his brothers and sisters that his father has swallowed and takes over the rulership of 
heaven, defeating and killing his father like his father had done before him, and establishing balance and 
harmony in the heavens and on earth.

(ll. 492-506) After that, the strength and glorious limbs of the prince increased quickly, and as the years rolled 
on, great Cronos the wily was beguiled by the deep suggestions of Earth, and brought up again his offspring, 
vanquished by the arts and might of his own son, and he vomited up first the stone which he had swallowed 
last. And Zeus set it fast in the wide-pathed earth at goodly Pytho under the glens of Parnassus, to be a sign 
thenceforth and a marvel to mortal men (20). And he set free from their deadly bonds the brothers of his father, 
sons of Heaven whom his father in his foolishness had bound. And they remembered to be grateful to him for 
his kindness, and gave him thunder and the glowing thunderbolt and lightening: for before that, huge Earth 
had hidden these. In them he trusts and rules over mortals and immortals. 

Compare this tale with perhaps one of the most popular and ubiquitous myths in ancient Egypt, the story of 
Osiris and Set, a story that is very much akin to the battle between Zeus and the Titans.  As the story is told 
on a variety of Egyptian inscriptions and textual fragments, the earliest dating from Old Kingdom Egypt on the 
Pyramid Texts (late third millennium BCE), Osiris is the first leader of the Egyptian pantheon and Egypt, who is 
overthrown and killed through a nefarious and graphic plot by his brother Set to take over the throne who 
cuts him to pieces and places him in a box in the sea.  Isis however, through her love and devotion to her 
husband/brother Osiris goes on a long and arduous journey across the lands to gather up the pieces of 
Osiris's body and then through great magic bring him back to life.  She then posthumously bears a child with 
him, Horus, who then avenges his father's murder, kills Set and takes over the (rightful) rule of Egypt.   Osiris 
after he is pieced together presides over the underworld to look after the living as they passed into the land 
of the dead, while Isis remains the goddess who presides over and looks after the living (the Greek Demeter) 
and Horus remains the presider over the pantheon and (united) Egypt. 
This great mythical tale that Hesiod spins for us, from the direct inspiration of the Muses which are so closely 
associated not only with the lyric poetic tradition of classical Greece but also the mystery cults of the Greeks 
as well, bears much resemblance to the mythical narratives to the East and West of ancient Greece, each of 
which tell the tale of a first generations of gods or first principles that are born out of Chaos, a watery abyss, 
from which emerge Heaven, Earth, Sea and Sky.  And then from this initial creation, the great Mother Earth 
(Gaia) produces the next generation of gods with the greatest of her siblings, Chronos, or Time (order, i.e. the 
Ma'at of the Egyptians), hence forth establishing order from the initial chaotic abyss.  And then the next 
generation of gods is brought forth and there is another (symbolic) overthrow of the reign of the gods and 
goddesses to a second generation, where Zeus, the god of thunder and lightning, takes the throne from his 
father after an epic battle between the older generation of gods (the Titans) and the new generation born of 
Earth.  
Interestingly, the attributes of Thunder and Lightning which are so closely associated with the Greek god 
Zeus, the head of the Olympic pantheon as it were, are also closely associated with the Sumer-Babylonian 
god Marduk, who as we learn from the Sumer-Babylonian theogony of the Enûma Eliš also comes to power 
via the overthrow of the second generation of gods ruled by Tiamat through another epic battle of the forces 
of good (represented by Marduk) and the forces of evil as represented by Tiamat.  Even more interesting 
perhaps are the parallels that can be drawn between Zeus and Marduk of the Greek and Sumer-Babylonian 
pantheons respectively to the role of Thunder and Lightning as a fundamental creative principle, a 
cornerstone of the cyclical process of universe creation as it were, in the mythos of the ancient Chinese as 
depicted in the notion of Zhèn (Thunder) as one of the eight primary trigrams, i.e. bāguà, of both the Earlier 
Heaven and Later Heaven sequences of bāguà from the Yìjīng.