
When trying to ascertain the belief systems of the ancients, and specifically as related to their views on 
cosmogony and theogony, one is apt to conclude that anything written by the Latin/Romans can add nothing 
to the historical record of value - outside of reflecting the beliefs of the Latin/Romans themselves whose 
culture is renowned to be primarily, at least from an intellectual and theological perspective, to be a simple 
borrowing and renaming of that of the Greeks who were their predecessors to the East and whose culture 
and peoples the Romans conquered and assimilated through various conquests from the 3rd century BCE until 
the classic "Fall" of the (Western) Roman Empire in 476 CE.

 
Figure 9: Roman Empire at its greatest extent under emperor Trajan, 117 CE. 

The Romans were a civilization that clearly borrowed from its predecessors in many respects, their 
geographic boundaries at their height spreading to the realm of the Persians to the Near East, the Egyptians 
to the South and of course the Greeks and Macedonians which were their neighbors in the Mediterranean.  
They clearly borrowed much of their culture and intellectual tradition, and underlying mythos, from the 
Greeks no doubt.  For example, as most of us know almost all of the Roman gods have direct Greek 
counterparts - Zeus to Juno, Poseidon to Neptune, Aphrodite to Venus, etc.  But they did however of course 
have their own form of expression and writing, i.e. Latin, which is the direct predecessor to our modern 
European languages and is the alphabet we still use in the West today so clearly their influence upon the 
West cannot be denied.  Additionally, Roman culture did produce the likes of Cicero and Marcus Aurelius, 
each influential philosophers and intellectuals in their own right, so we can't altogether dismiss the Romans 
as conquerors, developers of state craft and military prowess necessarily either. 
Even if we further presume that even if the Romans made some intellectual and philosophical contributions 
to Western thought, they produced no unique contributions to the domain of theology or mythology per se, 
collectively mythos, denying the heritage of say the Neo-Platonic tradition that although a product of the 
Roman/Byzantine empire nonetheless still evolves from a classically Hellenic, and Greek influence.  We do 
however, know the Romans as being responsible for the widespread adoption of Christianity however, even if 
it is after centuries of brutal persecution initially until it's basically adopted as the official religion of the 
Roman Empire at the end of the 4th century CE.  
The problem with this fairly simplistic and perhaps even prejudicial view of the Romans is that when one 
actually reads their classic mythological narrative, i.e. Ovid's Metamorphoses, at least from a theo-
philosophical perspective, one comes to altogether different conclusion entirely.  That is to say, the 
Metamorphoses, and the Latin/Roman mythos which it has come to represent, does contain some very 
unique elements to it that do add to the theo-philosophical tradition in antiquity.  If nothing else, perhaps it 
can be said that this work is one of the most influential and lasting epic narratives that has ever been 
produced in the West, rivaling the Iliad and the Odyssey in terms of notoriety and lasting influence which in 
and of itself makes a case for it to be analyzed on par with some of the other ancient theogonies such as 
Hesiod's Theogony or the Enûma Elišs of the Sumer-Babylonians.   Also, it's fair to say that even if there is no 
unique content or independent value of the work itself, it does however reflect the mythos of our direct 
cultural predecessor and in this respect alone is worthy of consideration and analysis.
Ovid's' Metamorphoses then, if nothing else (and we will argue that it is much more) represents the pinnacle 
and synthesis of centuries of theo-philosophical and mythological narratives throughout the Mediterranean 
in antiquity.  In other words, it is with Ovid that we find the most modern and developed interpretation of 
ancient myth as it was understood by the ancient peoples of the Mediterranean - peoples which included the 
Greeks, the Macedonians, the Sumer-Babylonians, the Egyptians and the Persians to name just a few of the 
major civilizations that came under Roman influence during the period of Roman Imperialism, a period which 
Ovid is born into and writes under.

Ovid, or Publius Ovidius Naso, was born in 43 BCE just to the East of Rome and died in exile on the coast of 
the Black Sea in 17/18 CE at the age of around 60.  Ovid wrote his poetry, his earlier work having to do with 
the art of love, during the reign of Caesar Augustus, the founder of the Roman Empire and its first 
Emperor.   Augustus ruled over a vast kingdom in the area of the Mediterranean that covered almost all of 
modern Western Europe, North Africa and Egypt, classical Greece and Macedonia of course, as well as Near 
Eastern lands that were formerly under Persian rule.  Augustus exiled Ovid to the Black Sea in 8 CE, just after 
the completion of his most famed work, the Metamorphoses, one of the richest and most expansive sources 
of Greek (and in turn Roman) mythology written in Latin in hexameter verse, the lingua franca so to speak of 
classic epic lyric poetry as had been established by the likes of Hesiod and Homer before him.
Ovid was well educated and of nobility, having been trained in the art of law and rhetoric in his youth.  He 
was of enough noble and aristocratic birth for example to hold various minor legal and judicial public offices 
in Rome before resigning to pursue poetry as a young adult somewhere in his late teens or early twenties.  
He is known to have travelled extensively as well, visiting places throughout the Roman Empire such as 
Athens, the Near East/Asia Minor, as well as Sicily and it was no doubt through this knowledge, along with his 
teachings in the classics, from which he came to author his most ambitious and lasting work. 
The Metamorphoses contains 15 books and covers over 250 myths, starting with the creation of the world, 
the first few generations of gods and goddesses and then in turn covering many of the popular myths that we 
have come to associate with Greco-Roman civilization - Jason and the Argonauts, the myth of the Minotaur, 
the story of Daedalus and Icarus, the deeds of Hercules, etc.  The work concludes with the history and 
mythology of the establishment of Rome, interwoven interestingly with material on Pythagorean philosophy, 
culminating with the reign and deification of Julius Caesar, establishing the work not just as a poetic narrative 
but as a historical narrative as well, connecting the mythological with the historical and political as most 
other ancient works of its kind.  From this perspective the impetus of the work could be seen somewhat in 
the same light as the Enûma Eliš and some of the Egyptian cosmological narratives, establishing the 
connection of the ruling class, or Roman Emperor in this case, to the reign of the gods and the birth of the 
universe.  Regardless there was something about Ovid's work that concerned Augustus, hence his exile which 
remained in effect till the end of his life.
Ovid starts with not only the full content and purpose of the work, but also with the basic cosmogonic 
narrative that has a more theo-philosophical bent than the classic theogonic works that we are accustomed 
to seeing from this era in antiquity.  From the opening verse we find:

Of bodies chang'd to various forms, I sing:  
Ye Gods, from whom these miracles did spring,  
Inspire my numbers with coelestial heat;  
'Till I my long laborious work compleat:  
And add perpetual tenour to my rhimes,  
Deduc'd from Nature's birth, to Caesar's times.  
Before the seas, and this terrestrial ball,  
And Heav'n's high canopy, that covers all,  
One was the face of Nature; if a face:  
Rather a rude and indigested mass:  
A lifeless lump, unfashion'd, and unfram'd,  
Of jarring seeds; and justly Chaos nam'd.  
No sun was lighted up, the world to view;  
No moon did yet her blunted horns renew:  
Nor yet was Earth suspended in the sky,  
Nor pois'd, did on her own foundations lye:  
Nor seas about the shores their arms had thrown;  
But earth, and air, and water, were in one.  
Thus air was void of light, and earth unstable,  
And water's dark abyss unnavigable.  
No certain form on any was imprest;  
All were confus'd, and each disturb'd the rest.  
For hot and cold were in one body fixt;  
And soft with hard, and light with heavy mixt.  


We see clearly here the notion of order out of Chaos, emerging out of a watery abyss of sorts, consistent not 
only with Hesiod's account of creation which starts with Chaos, but also with the Egyptian and Sumer-
Babylonian creation mythos which starts with this watery abyss from which the universe emerges.  Ovid still 
nonetheless establishes the anthropomorphic basis for the creation of the various gods and goddesses - the 
theogonical narrative - which sets the stage for the various transformations and mythical accounts of the 
gods and heroes of the golden age of man that represent the main storyline of Ovid's epic history of the 
world up until the present, i.e. the reign of Augustus.  
So while still have the immortal Chaos sitting at the pillar of creation, Time itself representing the "beginning" 
of the cosmos, we also have a much more "naturalist" creation mythos presented by Ovid, the universe 
emerging from the interplay and coalescence of opposing forces such as darkness and light, cold and heat, 
soft and hard that are reminiscent of the cosmogonic narratives of the Far East (i.e. China).  What is also 
striking about this introduction, and is also very reminiscent of the theo-philosophical systems of the Far East, 
is its primary focus on change itself, i.e. metamorphosis, as the overarching theme of the work, the 
underlying philosophy and theme of the work as a whole as it were.  Hence the title Metamorphoses and 
hence the inclusion toward the end of the work of the an explanation, and source, of this underlying 
philosophy which he attributes to Pythagoras.
Ovid then goes on to outline the basic building blocks, i.e. the elements, of creation - earth, air, fire and 
water - from which the Earth and Heavens and their various features are formed.  The emphasis in this 
creation mythos shifts slightly from its predecessors from a focus on theogony - the creation of the 
generation of gods with their respective male and female attributes and counterparts and their ensuing 
conflict and quest for dominance - to the creation of the underlying fabric of the natural world out of these 
basic "natural" elements, betraying a more Hellenic theo-philosophical influence to his work which should 
not be altogether surprising given the intellectual context within which Ovid writes.  
 
But God, or Nature, while they thus contend,  
To these intestine discords put an end:  
Then earth from air, and seas from earth were driv'n,  
And grosser air sunk from aetherial Heav'n.  
Thus disembroil'd, they take their proper place;  
The next of kin, contiguously embrace;  
And foes are sunder'd, by a larger space.  
The force of fire ascended first on high,  
And took its dwelling in the vaulted sky:  
Then air succeeds, in lightness next to fire;  
Whose atoms from unactive earth retire.  
Earth sinks beneath, and draws a num'rous throng  
Of pondrous, thick, unwieldy seeds along.  
About her coasts, unruly waters roar;  
And rising, on a ridge, insult the shore.  
Thus when the God, whatever God was he,  
Had form'd the whole, and made the parts agree,  
That no unequal portions might be found,  
He moulded Earth into a spacious round:  
Then with a breath, he gave the winds to blow;  
And bad the congregated waters flow.  
He adds the running springs, and standing lakes;  
And bounding banks for winding rivers makes.  
Some part, in Earth are swallow'd up, the most  
In ample oceans, disembogu'd, are lost.  
He shades the woods, the vallies he restrains  
With rocky mountains, and extends the plains.   


Outside of the flowing verse within which Ovid outlines this creation, it should strike the reader that while 
there remains a slight hint of skepticism about the notion of the existence of a Creator God ("whatever God 
was he"), akin to the "likely story" outlined in Plato's Timaeus which Ovid no doubt was intimately familiar 
with, this Creator (Plato's Demiurge) is nonetheless front and center in the role of forming and shaping the 
world.  This synthesis of Hellenic mythos and philosophy is a unique characteristic of the work itself in fact, 
and in many respects foreshadows, and perhaps even plants some of the seeds, of the ensuing theo-
philosophical revolution that is to take place quite soon thereafter, within the boundaries of the Roman 
Empire, stemming from the life and teachings of the Hebrew Jesus of Nazareth which over the next few 
centuries evolves into what we know today as Christianity.
Ovid continues his creation narrative with the final act of creation as it were, the creation of mankind, which 
contains many motifs and storylines that are reminiscent of the Hebrew creation story attributed to Moses 
(i.e. Genesis), as heaven is split and separated from the Earth, the various animals and beasts are created to 
fill the world, and mankind is formed as the last act of creation, bearing a special place in the halls of God's 
creation as a direct descendant of the Creator himself.

 
Scarce had the Pow'r distinguish'd these, when streight  
The stars, no longer overlaid with weight,  
Exert their heads, from underneath the mass;  
And upward shoot, and kindle as they pass,  
And with diffusive light adorn their heav'nly place.  
Then, every void of Nature to supply,  
With forms of Gods he fills the vacant sky:  
New herds of beasts he sends, the plains to share:  
New colonies of birds, to people air:  
And to their oozy beds, the finny fish repair.  
 
A creature of a more exalted kind  
Was wanting yet, and then was Man design'd:  
Conscious of thought, of more capacious breast,  
For empire form'd, and fit to rule the rest:  
Whether with particles of heav'nly fire  
The God of Nature did his soul inspire,  
Or Earth, but new divided from the sky,  
And, pliant, still retain'd th' aetherial energy:  
Which wise Prometheus temper'd into paste,  
And, mixt with living streams, the godlike image cast.  
 
Thus, while the mute creation downward bend  
Their sight, and to their earthly mother tend,  
Man looks aloft; and with erected eyes  
Beholds his own hereditary skies.  
From such rude principles our form began;  
And earth was metamorphos'd into Man.  

In analyzing Ovid's account of creation then, we can clearly see a variety of themes and motifs from various 
other creation narratives from the other civilizations which dominated the Mediterranean and Near East and 
pre-dated the period of Roman Imperial expansion and cultural synthesis which Ovid's work clearly reflects.  
He integrates all of these old creation stories into the Hellenic theo-philosophical and mythological tradition, 
creating an altogether unique creation narrative.  
For example while we see a reference, albeit not necessarily a direct account, of the battle between the 
second and first generation of gods which plays such a prominent role in the Egyptian, Hellenic and Sumer-
Babylonian mythos, Ovid's account of this battle and the ultimate reign of Jupiter (Zeus) is de-emphasized, 
replaced by a more (Middle) Platonic narrative that still nonetheless retains the existence of the Greco-
Roman pantheon from which not only much of his mythical narrative is based upon, but also in fact to which 
he eventually connects Julius Caesar and Augustus as divine descendants to in the closing Books of the work.
We also see here in Ovid's creation account mankind being called out as having a special place in "God's" 
creation, being formed out of Earth as it were, synthesizing no doubt the notion of Plato's Demiurge with the 
Hebrew notion of the one true God, i.e. Yahweh.  This account is followed by a fairly lengthy description of 
this so-called "Golden Age" of man, which eventually evolves into subsequent morally degenerative ages 
which cause the gods to destroy their greatest creation via a Great Flood.   This narrative is all very 
reminiscent of the creation narrative in Genesis, where the Golden Age of Ovid corresponds to the creation 
of primordial man and woman in the Garden of Eden where death and suffering is not known to them.  In this 
well-known account of their expulsion from the Garden, Adam is deceived by his woman partner, via the 
snake, to eat the "forbidden fruit" which angers Yahweh and gets them expelled from the Garden, and leads 
to Yahweh's "curse" of man, due to his "original sin", such that he must now toil the earth for sustenance and 
the woman must go through the pain of child bearing to rear children.   Further along in this mythical-
historical narrative in Genesis, Yahweh becomes disappointed with man given his moral and ethical 
degeneration, and just as in Ovid's narrative, destroys all mankind via a Great Flood, saving only Noah due to 
his righteousness.   This Great Flood narrative with the destruction of all mankind and their subsequent 
regeneration as it were through the sole survivor of a single moral and righteous being selected by the gods, 
of course can also be found in the great ancient Sumerian Epic of Gilgamesh as well, a tale which can be 
traced as far back in antiquity to the end of the second millennium BCE .  
While the works of Hesiod and Manu pre-date Ovid's work by centuries if not more, they do speak to the far 
reaching intellectual and mythical lore that Ovid clearly had access to, and ultimately synthesizes, into his 
work.  It also perhaps speaks to the synthesis of Greco-Roman, or perhaps in a broader sense Mediterranean 
mythos, into the Hindu mythological tradition - or of course perhaps the existence of a mythological tradition 
that pre-dates all these civilizations from which they all draw from as their source.  
Furthermore, parallels have also been drawn between the Tree of Life which was planted in the center of the 
Garden of Eden and from which Adam and Eve ate from, and a tree motif that is found throughout ancient 
Mesopotamia and the Near East dating as far back as the 4th and 3rd millenniums BCE.  This ancient 
Mesopotamian tree, the so called "Assyrian Tree of Life", which although is not alluded or referred to in any 
of the written transcriptions or writings from ancient Mesopotamia, clearly has religious and mystical 
connotations given the context within which it has been found from an archeological perspective.  One 
scholar has gone so far as to directly correlate this Assyrian tree motif, which plays such a prominent role in 
the Genesis Adam and Eve story, to the Kabbalistic Tree of Life, which of course represents the essence of the 
Jewish mystical tradition.   

 
Figure 10: Depiction of Assyrian Tree of Life 

All of this of course shows the clear corollaries and heavy cultural borrowing of many of the themes we find 
in Ovid's creation narrative, which stems mostly of course from his Greek predecessor Hesiod, but also the 
connections between Ovid's creation account and the Hebrew narrative in Genesis which contain 
Mesopotamian and Sumer-Babylonian themes and story lines which pre-date Genesis by centuries.
And lastly but certainly not least of all, the focus of Ovid's work on change itself, i.e. Metamorphoses, and the 
parallels that can be drawn to the early Pre-Socratic philosophers such as Heraclitus and of course Pythagoras 
to which Ovid alludes to specifically as the source of his philosophy, can also be found as the basis for almost 
all of Chinese philosophy as reflected in the Chinese Classic of Changes, i.e. the Yìjīng, a work whose origins 
can be traced as far back as second millennium BCE China in the Far East.  This interesting parallel begs some 
serious questions with respect to how old some of these basic philosophical principles are, i.e. the notion of 
change and impermanence as the essence of reality, and how is it that two cultures separated by thousands 
of miles with no known trade or cultural exchange until the 2nd or 3rd centuries CE could have adopted such 
similar theo-philosophical systems of belief.