
These mythological narratives clearly reached back at some level or another into the pre-civilization times of 
the societies within which they emerged, there was clearly not only similarities between the accounts, but 
also clearly some "borrowing" of the narratives between and among the various civilizations which thrived 
during this time period in human and social evolution.  They all for the most part share this common theme 
of the world emerging from a watery chaos, some of which (Orphic, Indo-Aryan and later Chinese myths for 
example) also contain the fairly distinctive metaphor of the world emerging from a great cosmic egg from 
which the realms of Heaven and Earth emerge, and then from this cosmic soup, or egg as the case may be, 
the basic elements or components of the material universe are created - Earth, Sky, Stars, Water, Heaven, 
etc. -providing the foundations upon which mankind and civilization itself could spring forth and flourish.  
Leaving aside the fairly distinctive characteristics of the cosmogonic accounts of the ancient Chinese, there 
are clearly subtle and distinctive aspects of these creation narratives from the Mediterranean and Near East 
that reflect the various different belief systems and socio-political environments of these various cultures 
within which these theogonic accounts were created and established, and then preserved via various forms 
of writing - most of which were religious and political in nature, the distinction between the two social 
constructs being much less clear in antiquity than it is today.  In the Egyptian, Sumer-Babylonian, Greek and 
Roman theogonies, for example, there clearly existed reference points and patterns of the use of mythos to 
establish a clear line of authority to the existing rulers, and in the Enûma Eliš, as well as Hesiod's Theogony 
and Ovid's Metamorphoses, we find the first generation of gods emerging out of this watery abyss, this 
chaotic primordial soup as it were, followed by the ensuing conflict among the generation of gods from which 
ultimate power is bestowed upon the great god of the respective civilization - Jupiter to the Romans, Zeus to 
the Greeks, Marduk to the Sumer-Babylonians and Amon-Ra, Ptah or Atum to the Egyptians depending upon 
the variant of the mythos.  
Although this generational theogony from which the cosmos and then ultimately man is born is absent from 
the Far East accounts, namely from India and China, in China at least there is a link that is established from 
the founders and rulers of the various Chinese Dynasties in antiquity to the deities that presided over the 
universe, even if in the later tradition it stemmed from the more theo-philosophical notion of Heaven (Tiān) 
rather than directly to an anthropomorphic generation of deities that is so characteristic of the creation 
mythos from the Mediterranean and Near East in antiquity.  What is clear however, is that these creation 
narratives that we find evidence of from the 2nd and 1st millennium BCE, is that there are many similar 
concepts and ideas that are put forth, and the narratives themselves also serve similar purposes, throughout 
virtually all of the civilizations that we have looked at in Eurasia that we have looked at - the connection of 
the king or ruler to the pantheon that emerges from the watery chaos from which the cosmos is created 
either through heredity directly or through the more conceptual framework presented by the ancient 
Chinese via the Mandate of Heaven.  Even the Indo-Aryans established a social stratification of society that it 
linked back to their theogonic and cosmogonic narratives, even if they were part of a later stratification of 
myth (from the Laws of Manu for example).  
The civilization from which Hinduism emerges for example, the successor civilization of the ancient Indo-
Aryan peoples who settled in and ruled over what is today India, is historically associated with the Indus 
Valley, a river system from which an ancient culture could grow crops and thrive, no doubt a very similar 
relationship to the Sumer-Babylonians who settled in the Tigris-Euphrates Valley, the Egyptians who had such 
a close relationship to the Nile, and the various ancient Chinese people who had a similar close tie to the 
Yellow River which is closely associated with the dawn of their civilization.  Clearly this close relationship to 
each of these respective peoples and their reliance on water for sustenance, for life, was clearly a driving 
factor for water being the main primordial substance from which the universe emerges in almost all of these 
creation narratives.  The authors of the of the Vedas and Purāṇas held such beliefs as reflected in the "cosmic 
waters" (āpas in Sanskrit) as the source of universal creation, just as the Egyptians had their concept of Nu 
and the Ancient Sumerians had their Apsû - each signifying basically the same principle and each having 
direct etymological associations with water in some form or another.  
In each of these ancient civilizations and cultures, their respective river system was the source of their crops 
and where they bathed and drank, just as the peoples around these river systems do today.  These river 
systems are the very source of life, river systems that if they dried out the civilizations themselves would 
perish, no doubt the reason why the held the notion of water almost directly akin to life itself.  In turn, the 
seasonal floods which no doubt framed their entire existence and relationship with the natural world, framed 
their idea of the passage of time and overall sense of order - both on earth and in the heavens which was 
used to track the seasons and passage of time itself.  Therefore, it should be no surprise that we see the basic 
principle of water and the notion of order as it relates to the seasons and the motion of the heavens 
reflected in all of these ancient cosmogonic narratives.  That's not to say that there was not a borrowing or 
sharing of these mythological motifs that occurred between these ancient peoples - as we know there was at 
least throughout the Mediterranean and Near East - but then again it should come as no surprise as to how 
these cosmogonic narratives came to take their original shape to begin with, even if they all stemmed from 
the same narrative source sometime deep in pre-history.
We also find parallels with the so-called Ages of Man, as reflected perhaps in its most mature form in Ovid's 
account which outlines Four Ages - Golden, Silver, Bronze and Iron - of more fierce and warlike Bronze Age 
which was followed by the period of the Great Flood and the subsequent re-incarnation of man in the 4th and 
final Iron Age which represents the current age of man.  We also find a very similar thematic outline of the 
evolution of mankind from Hesiod's Works and Days which outlines five ages - Golden, Silver, Bronze, Heroic 
and ten Iron - closely aligning to Ovid's account and in all likelihood from which he drew his inspiration.  We 
also find a similar account of the Ages of Man from the Laws of Manu (Manusmriti) albeit using different 
terminology and residing within a very different theological context.  In Manu's account, he provides a very 
similar description of the "downfall" of man from an era of truth and righteousness (the Krta Age) down 
through three more ages of man to the current age of relative relatively less righteousness and moral and 
ethical fortitude (the present era or Kālī Age, aka Kālī Yuga).  
A similar account of the Ages of Man can be found in the Purāṇas as well, another Indo-Aryan/Hindu mythical 
work believed to have been composed between the 2nd and 10th centuries CE.  All of which of course bear 
very strong similarities to the accounts of the so-called "fall of man" by Hesiod as well as Ovid, an allegorical 
version of which can be found in the proverbial "fall of man" from the Garden in Judeo-Christian mythos as 
preserved in Genesis.   Furthermore, we see the Great Flood play a significant role in most of these 
traditions as it relates specifically to the so-called "fall of man", a narrative we find not only in the familiar 
account in Genesis but also in Ovid's account of the history of man and in Sumer-Babylonian mythos in the 
Epic of Gilgamesh which is perhaps the source of most of the subsequent narratives, or consistent with our 
Laurasian hypothesis it is from an earlier source than all of these that these similar narratives find themselves 
rooted in all of the mythos of all these ancient peoples spread across such a wide geography (Eurasia) and 
expanse of time.
We can find other striking parallels between the ancient Persians and Indo-Aryans mythos specifically, not 
only linguistically and philologically, but also in terms of customs and rituals as reflected in their respective 
extant theological works from the earliest historical records we have the respective civilizations.  Speaking to 
a very close shared heritage no doubt, linguistically identified as the Proto-Indo-Europeans from which the 
Indo-Iranians and the Indo-Aryans are descended.  Similar to the Vedic tradition as we understand it from 
antiquity from the material from the oldest of the Vedas, i.e. the rituals and hymns recorded in the Rigvéda, 
the practice of ritual and the recitation of verses from the Gathas and Yasna clearly represents the core part 
of what we have come to understand as the oldest layer of the Zoroastrian faith - similarities between the 
Indo-Aryans and the Indo-Iranians as we understand them through the Vedas and the Gathas and Yasna 
abound.  
Given that both of these traditions are still actively practiced, i.e. the rituals and verses and ceremonies 
described in the respective scripture - the Avesta of the Indo-Iranians which founded Persia civilization and 
the Vedas of the Indo-Aryans - we still know how some of the language documented in these ancient texts is 
actually pronounced, revealing striking similarities not only linguistically (philology) but also in terms of the 
overall content and purpose of the ceremonies themselves.   Gathic, or Old Avestan shares many common 
characteristics and similarities to Vedic Sanskrit, the writing of the most archaic of the Vedas, the Rigvéda, 
whose composition is also dated to the latter part of the second millennium BCE.  Not only do the two 
languages share many of the same words and terms, but the hymns and rituals which are described in the 
two texts share many of the same attributes and patterns, speaking to a very close relationship between the 
two peoples that was captured by the authors and preservers of these ancient theological traditions, the 
contents of which - in the Avesta and the Vedas - describe rituals and prayers that were most certainly 
practiced in the early part of the second millennium BCE by these respective peoples if not even earlier.  
The oldest written representations of these two ancient languages survive down to us under two different 
writing systems, the Vedic Sanskrit surviving in its oldest form in Brāhmī script which was used from the 3rd 
century BCE to the 5th century CE in South and Central Asia (and also stems from the Phoenician alphabetic 
system), and the Avesta in Avestan which was used from around 400-1000 CE and as already noted was 
specifically designed for the purpose of codifying Zoroastrian lore and practice.  Given the common heritage 
and lineage of the different scripts which capture these ancient tongues, linguists and philologists can 
identify phonetic patterns and word pronunciation similarities between the two languages even though 
neither of which is spoken today, providing more evidence of the close association and cultural and linguistic 
exchange between these two civilizations reaching back into prehistoric (pre 2nd millennium BCE) times.
From a socio-cultural and even theological perspective, this linguistic relationship, both in terms of forms of 
writing and in terms of speech, effectively gives us two-dimensional window into the theological or religious 
world of the Near and Far East (modern day Iran and India) in the second millennium BCE which is the date 
typically associated with the Avestan and Vedic Sanskrit languages (not the texts but the languages 
themselves). 
In Zoroastrianism, again as is true with the Hindus as well, pronunciation of words and the practice of specific 
rituals is an important part of their worship and this is reflected in the fact that they, albeit not until the first 
few centuries CE, created of a specific script designed just for this purpose - namely Avestan.  Avestan is 
written language that is a derivative of the more popular and pervasive Pahlavi script which was used by the 
Persians in antiquity to encode a variety of Middle Iranian Languages from around their empire.  Pahlavi is 
derived from a more archaic Aramaic script, which in turn was derived from the same Phoenician alphabet, 
the very same alphabet from which ancient Greek, ancient Hebrew, and ancient Brāhmī script (a derivation of 
which was used to transcribe Sanskrit) was derived from, speaking to not only of course the common origins 
of all of the alphabetic writing systems used by these ancient peoples, but also clearly evidence of some 
element of cultural exchange that must have existed at some point in ancient history between these various 
peoples and cultures which spread and took root from as far East as Greece and the Middle East, to Persia 
and the Near East (the home of the Avesta) all the way to the Indus Valley region, the home of the Vedas.
Also of interest is that the Greek word for hymn or song, ymnos, which was clearly very prevalent and 
important in the ancient Hellenic world as illustrated in the widespread and well documented traditions of 
Homer, Hesiod, and Orpheus, means almost the same thing as its linguistic counterpart to the East - yasna to 
the Indo-Iranians and yajña to the Indo-Aryans.  In the Greek tradition however, the connotation of the word 
is somewhat devoid of the of the notion of ritual or sacrifice, perhaps because the sacrificial aspect of the 
hymns themselves was dropped by the Greeks, at least outside of the mystery cult traditions of which we 
know little about given the veil of secrecy within which these practices were shielded.  One could argue that 
the Greek word for hymn or song, ymnos, which represented such an integral part of the ritualistic and 
theological tradition even in Greece - as reflected in the prevalence and importance of the hymns of Hesiod 
and Homer in the Hellenic philosophical and cultural tradition - could be and probably was a direct derivative 
from these two relatively more ancient religious systems to the East.  This is perhaps evidence of much closer 
ties of these cultures from a religious and theological perspective.  It is perhaps not that far-fetched to 
conclude that this very similar word or term that found its way into the languages of these geographically 
dispersed civilizations in antiquity - from Greece/Ionia in the Mediterranean and Near East to the 
Persian/Iranians in Asia Minor to the Indo-Aryans/Hindus of modern day India - that carried such cultural and 
theological import is evidence of perhaps more cultural exchange and intellectual communication between 
these cultures in the 3rd and 2nd millenniums BCE than historians, academics and classicists typically presume.

What is certainly unique to the Greek/Hellenic tradition however, i.e. Hellenic mythos, was that they more 
than any other ancient civilization were obsessed with the idea that the universe could be, and should be, 
placed upon rational grounds wherever possible.  It was this idea, one of the hallmarks of the ancient 
Hellenes, or "Classical Greece" as it is typically referred to, that contributed toward the birth of reason which 
becomes one of the hallmarks in turn of Western civilization as a whole - what came to known from a 
philosophical perspective, perhaps most pronounced in the Stoic tradition which in turn provided the basis 
for Judeo-Christian theology , as Logos.  Reason, or again Logos, was the metaphysical lever as it were, that 
was used to support the characteristically Hellenic pivot away from the more ancient and pre-historic 
theogonic and cosmogonic narratives - i.e. again mythos - that had persisted for thousands of years prior to 
the advent of philosophy.  While the Hellenes no doubt held fast to the mythological traditions and worship 
of the respective gods therein as espoused and put forth in the lasting works of Hesiod and Homer for 
example even during the height of philosophical influence in the Hellenic world, they still nonetheless, again 
characteristically, provided the socio-political environment within which the Hellenic philosophical tradition 
could flourish more or less despite its generally unfavorable position toward the political establishment as it 
were.  The underlying friction of the two traditions - the philosophers on the one hand and the political 
establishment or authority on the other - from a socio-political perspective is illustrated for example in the 
execution of Socrates by the Athenians, a conviction that was handed down by the Athenian council toward 
Socrates because of allegations against him related to impiety as well as corrupting the youth no less. 
It is perhaps no accident then, that Socrates plays such a pivotal role in the establishment of the philosophical 
tradition in ancient Greece, in the Hellenic world throughout the Mediterranean, that was to have such a 
long standing and powerful imprint on Western philosophy and theology as it evolves into its present day 
monotheistic variants in Christianity, Judaism  and Islam most notably.  This reason was referred to within the 
Hellenic philosophical tradition originally as wisdom, i.e. sophia, which sits quite literally at its very heart in 
the root of the word that was used to describe the tradition itself - - i.e. "philo" + "sophia", or "lover of 
wisdom", i.e. philosophia - a name which according to tradition is attributed to by Pythagoras himself, a sage 
from Hellenic antiquity that is considered by many (author included) to in many respects be the father of the 
Hellenic philosophical.  In other words, it was the Hellenic philosophical tradition more so than any other in 
the ancient Mediterranean world perhaps, that characterized this separation between theology as it was 
conceived in antiquity as mythos, and authority and power. 
The Hellenes from the ancient Mediterranean no doubt were the first to establish the supremacy of reason 
and logic, verifiable truth, over "myth", a belief system that had carried mankind through the darkness of 
pre-history for thousands of years.  In the Hellenic philosophical tradition, these ancient belief systems were 
not discounted altogether, but they were nonetheless held to be less true, less real as it were than 
philosophy proper (philosophia), which again was founded upon the principles of reason and logic, the latter 
of which was a new discipline entirely that emerged in the Mediterranean as well as the Indian subcontinent 
at around the same time as writing and advanced civilization as far as we can tell.  This is what Plato and 
Aristotle in particular took care to distinguish from eternally verifiable or rationally deduced truths as it were, 
what they called out as "opinion" or "belief" which was defined in contrast to, and was considered to be 
epistemologically less significant than, wisdom, again sophia, which was based upon reason, the new found 
god of the Hellenes you might say. 
Much of the mythos of these ancient peoples, the rituals and the priesthood, was intended to bifurcate 
society into those that knew god, and those that didn't.  And this established order or authority of the one 
class of people over the other.  Even with the Greeks, the priesthoods had power and represented 
established authority to some extent, although with the advent of their democracy, which to some extent 
grew hand in hand with their philosophy and the evolution of their world view, they moved away from this 
old guard of authority which had its source in the priesthood and worship of the gods.  Most certainly with 
the Sumer-Babylonians and the Egyptians this connection was there as the leadership relied on the authority 
of these priests to maintain their power.  And it was the people's belief in the existence of the gods, and the 
priests' direct communion or connection with these deities, that kept the peace as it were and established 
the norms and various stratifications and classifications of the society, in particular firmly delineating those 
who held power and those that did not.  
This subtle distinction, what you might call the very first example of the separation between "church and 
state" (which although doesn't precisely describe the actual situation is the best modern analogy perhaps 
that can be found), the break from political authority resting on divine authority, theology and/or mythos, 
turned out to be one of the most important, significant and lasting contributions of the Hellenes to Western 
civilization.  One that came at the blood of Socrates no less and one that marked a significant break and 
divergence from pre-historic society which was founded on these principles more or less.  For it was this 
separation of mythos from politics or royalty, attributing the mythological account to divine inspiration as it 
were, perhaps the hallmark of Hellenic philosophy, that laid the foundation for the creation of philosophical 
traditions that formed the basis of academia as we understand it today, and then much later in the post 
Enlightenment Era, Science.  
But at the same time the parallels between all of these ancient mythological narratives from the 
Mediterranean and Near East, all beginning more or less their creation narratives of the emergence of order 
from chaos, all of these ancient civilizations nonetheless were no doubt compelled to answer these basic 
questions - Who are we and from whence we came?  The emergence of universal order, i.e. the kosmos, out 
of chaos and the "watery abyss", which provided for the ground and basis for the creation of mankind and in 
turn civilization as we understand it most clearly after writing is developed and we start to have direct 
intellectual evidence, breadcrumbs as it were, from the minds of these first philosophers from Eurasian 
antiquity, and then - through the use of language itself as a tool for advanced abstract thought, thought 
which could persist from generation to generation, that could be transformed and evolve through the 
generations as the teachings were passed down from teacher to student, transformed over time into 
advanced systems philosophy, intellectual systems and paradigms that that did not have to be encapsulated 
in myth so that it could be supported by oral transmission techniques, the technological advancement that 
has served mankind for thousands of years, millennia even, before the invention of writing and the alphabet - 
in turn the question of how society as a whole should be structured, based upon reason rather than 
monarchical decree or social stratification that had been in place for the preceding generations, political 
philosophy or what in the Hellenic and Western tradition comes to be called practical philosophy, was then 
also addressed.  
These shared characteristics and challenges in fact we find covered and explored in the very first 
philosophical works that we see throughout antiquity across all of Eurasia - from the Mediterranean to the 
Near East and Persia to the Indian subcontinent and the Indo-Aryans and Hindus to the Far East and China.  
They all struggled with the same questions and problems more or less, and they all pivoted from mythos to 
philosophy.  Each culture and society, each philosophical tradition as it were, might have all come up with 
slightly different answers - each tailored to their own nuanced and distinctive cultures and histories - but 
they all addressed the fundamental problem of rationalizing cosmogony and theogony more or less, as well 
as establishing the (rational and moral) basis for socio-political order.  
As further evidence of our Laurasian hypothesis, we also find across many of these ancient mythos from 
across Eurasia the motif of the cosmic egg from which Heaven and Earth are formed and the universal order, 
i.e. the cosmos, is established.  In the Orphic tradition for example, a tradition which in many ways was the 
hallmark of Hellenic theogony (outside of the lyric poetical tradition established by Hesiod at least) we see 
the protogenital anthropomorphic man or figure, i.e. Phanes or Protogonus come forth from this cosmic egg:

O Mighty first-begotten, hear my pray'r,  1 
Two-fold, egg-born, and wand'ring thro' the air,
Bull-roarer, glorying in thy golden wings,  3 
From whom the race of Gods and mortals springs.
Ericapæus, celebrated pow'r,  
Ineffable, occult, all shining flow'r. 
From eyes obscure thou wip'st the gloom of night, 
All-spreading splendour, pure and holy light 
Hence Phanes call'd, the glory of the sky, 
On waving pinions thro' the world you fly.  
Priapus, dark-ey'd splendour, thee I sing, 
Genial, all-prudent, ever-blessed king,
With joyful aspect on our rights divine 
And holy sacrifice propitious shine. 

The protogenital deity Phanes, aka Protogonus, in the Orphic theogony narrative, illustrated in the above 
passage from the Hymns of Orpheus, is the first and foremost of the immortal beings who emerges, self-
created, from the great cosmic egg from which the universe is born and from which Heavens and Earth are 
created.  Phanes here is depicted as this great mythological winged creature who has the attributes of both 
man and beast, depicted in some accounts as having 4 eyes, four horns, and the body of a serpent, a bull, a 
lion, and a ram.  It is from this fist great primordial being, both male and female, who emerges from the great 
cosmic egg of creation, that the universe begins to unfold and the initial generation of gods springs, i.e. 
theogony.  
We see essentially the same narrative across all of these ancient civilizations that as far as we know, at least 
from the archeological and written records, had no significant cultural contact with each other - at least not 
this far back in history (the Egyptian and Mediterranean cultures being the exception here of course).  We 
see an almost direct mythic parallel for example to the Orphic cosmogony surrounding the protogenital man, 
Pángǔ from ancient Chinese mythos, who emerges from a cosmic egg after a great deluge of sorts (i.e. Great 
Flood) which destroys mankind, and then establishes universal order through Yīn-Yáng, the primordial first 
principles as it were, after which the natural world and civilization emerges, born again as it were out of the 
great cosmic egg.  We see virtually the same cosmic egg based theogony in ancient Egypt as well, in the 
tradition surrounding Hermopolis that establishes creation from and out of the Ogdoad, or Great Eight, which 
also emerges out of a cosmic egg, the first primordial deity being the god of the Sun, Ra, in that account.
Furthermore, we see striking similarities in the cosmogonical narrative in the Indo-Aryan tradition as well, as 
we see it preserved in the Rigvéda, wherein an epithet of Prajāpati, the creator of the universe in many of 
the Vedic hymns, is Hiraṇyagarbha, which means literally "golden egg" or "golden womb".  The same motif 
can be found in the famed Laws of Manu, i.e. Manusmriti which provides much of the moral and socio-
political foundations of modern Hindu society, akin to Plat's Republic in a way.  The Laws of Manu contains in 
its introductory chapter a cosmogonic and theogonic narrative, establishing the basis of the moral and ethical 
precepts, and again socio-political framework, for what is the core of the text.  Here the tale of the Ages of 
Man, the Great Flood and emergence of the cosmos out of a great cosmic egg are also prevalent. 
There was also the common theme of a pantheon of deities that emerge through a theogony that is rooted in 
the cosmogony as it were, each of whom represented one of the basic natural principles - again Earth, Air, 
Water, Fire, Sky, Moon, Sun, etc. - which all of these ancient peoples were subject to within the context of 
Nature itself, and all of whom became manifest in these theogonies and were worshipped in order that their 
duties, and the cosmological order really, be kept in balance.  These very same deities, these basic primitive 
forces which were layered into these very same theogonic and cosmogonic narratives, not only created the 
universe with their divine powers, but they effectively represented these various aspects of the universe, 
Nature, as well.  This common theogonic narrative we see co-emergent with civilization itself in Eurasian 
antiquity in fact, a hallmark of the very beginning of each of these respective great civilizations - the 
Egyptians, the Hellenes, the Romans, the Indians, etc. - a narrative, collectively mythos, that provides not just 
an explanation as to how the world, and mankind, came into existence, but also providing the moral and 
ethical basis, with the notions of order and balance, for society which according to the ancients at least 
should reflect the harmony and order of the cosmos. 
These gods were different for each of the ancient civilizations, and they were created in different orders and 
had different relationships with each other, no doubt reflecting the different underlying importance of the 
principles which they represented for each of the respective societies.  But these deities were a key part of 
the establishment of the world order nonetheless.  Or perhaps better put mankind was made in the likeness 
of these deities, albeit mortal.  So while these deities Gods were immortalized, they were also 
anthropomorphized as well, for that was the only metaphysical construct, or at least the easiest to explain 
and understand, that resonated with these ancient peoples.  And because these immortals had human 
characteristics, they therefore had human attributes, wants and needs as well, needs that had to be provided 
by those that worshipped them.  This effectively describes the relationship between the peoples of pre-
historical Eurasia, from the Upper Paleolithic to the Bronze Age, and their gods which we look upon from our 
modern, monotheistic lens - as did the Greeks as well - as pagan and barbaric religious practices.
There is no doubt that each of these ancient civilizations had an inherent need or desire to understand how 
order and in turn mankind emerged from the grand mystery of the universe, from nothingness or the eternal 
void.  Clearly all of these ancient civilizations had a yearning to understand or formulate some sort of 
coherent story line that explained how the world was born and how mankind came to be, and how this 
understanding was to be leveraged and used to support the development of advanced societies, societies 
that were in fact bound by their mythos and its associated cosmogony and theogony - the worship of these 
gods that formed the basis of creation and sustained and supported the stability and order of Nature so that 
their society and civilization, and ultimately their own life, could prosper.  As it turns out, at least in the 
Mediterranean and Near East, it is clear that each of these ancient civilizations shared many of the same 
ideas, concepts and notions, i.e. mythos, as to how the universal order was established as well as how it was 
to be properly maintained.  Whether this was a result of cultural and theological diffusion, i.e. borrowing, or 
because they all started with a very similar story line that evolved in different times and places for different 
peoples is hard to say, but the extent of the commonalities as well as the specificities of the commonalities 
themselves certainly indicates that a shared origins hypothesis, as we have proposed (following Witzel) in 
what we are calling the Laurasian hypothesis certainly looks like the best possible explanation - given what 
we now know about ancient human migration via the study of the human genome and the continued lack of 
archeological, written or other evidence that suggests any direct cultural exchange between these ancient 
civilizations that were geographically so dispersed throughout Eurasia.