
We see the first evidence of Chinese writing, pictograms or logograms on bronze and bone artifacts from the 
last years of the Xia Dynasty (2070 - 1600 BCE), almost four thousand years ago.  This writing system, the 
foundations of which became the what we now refer to as Chinese "characters", were highly symbolic and 
hieroglyphic in nature, appearing in the archeological records on Bronze castings, tortoise shells, and cattle 
bones, the latter of which were primarily used for divination purposes.  Inscription on Bronze castings (金文, 
literally "text on metal" or "text on gold") typically represented a clan or family membership as well as socio-
political status.  This ancient form of writing is referred to sometimes in the academic literature as Oracle 
Bone Script, or Shell script (甲骨, literally "text, "文" on shells, "甲" and bones, "骨") a form of writing which 
was used up until the early Western Zhou Dynasty (1046 - 771 BCE). 
The successor to these forms of writing were Seal script (篆書, literally "decorative engraving script") which 
in turn evolved into Clerical script during the Warring States Period (c. 475 - 221 BCE) and Qin Dynasty (221 - 
206 BCE) periods of Chinese antiquity.   It is during the short reign of the Qin Dynasty that (most of) what 
we consider to be modern China was unified post Warring States Period and in turn standard forms of writing 
and literature were established.   Most of the classic literature we have from China antiquity was compiled 
in the first millennium BCE and written on bamboo or silk in a written language that has come to be known as 
Classical Chinese , also known as "Literary Chinese", a written form of the Old Chinese language which was 
used for almost all formal writing in China up until the early 20th century. 
As Seal script emerged as the written standard, used primarily by an educated aristocratic class of scholars 
who were typically associated with the various courts of the ruling bodies, the foundational set of standard 
Chinese characters was established that were to be used for over two thousand years that would eventually 
evolve into a set of even more sophisticated ideograms and morphemes which were capable of encapsulating 
and transcribing all of the various languages that were prevalent in China and the surrounding regions 
throughout its longstanding history.  One of the distinguishing characteristics of ancient China in fact, given 
its vast regional territories and various peoples and cultures which inhabited what we today call "China" in 
antiquity, was the persistence of a single system of writing that could be used to encode and transcribe all of 
the various languages that were spoken throughout classically Chinese territories in antiquity, some of which 
were not even from the same (spoken) language family.
The modern Chinese character set includes over 50,000 characters, and has evolved to support the 
transcription of a wide array of modern spoken languages which include of course Chinese, but also include 
other Asian (spoken) languages such as Korean, Japanese and Vietnamese along with a host of other Chinese 
dialects like Mandarin.  The writing system has of course grown increasingly complex to support these broad 
linguistic features over the centuries, millennia really, and given that it is not based upon an alphabetic 
system as we are accustomed to in the West, it is quite foreign to Westerners and is very difficult to learn.  
Specifically, and of particular relevance to this work which tries to ascertain and comprehend the meaning of 
ancient Chinese texts, the ancient Chinese forms of script can be very difficult to translate, really 
transliterate, given the very different nature of the symbols themselves as well as the unique nature of some 
of the characters and symbols that are only found in the ancient texts, the meaning of which can only 
(potentially) be understood by tracing, if possible, the etymology of the specific characters back through 
Oracle Bone and Bronze inscriptions. 
At the same however, the unique nature of written Chinese also provides us with an almost unbroken lineage 
of ideograms and logograms that reach directly back into deep Chinese antiquity, something that cannot be 
said of the writing systems that survive in the West, the Indian subcontinent included.  In some cases certain 
characters, words or phrases can be traced all the way back through modern Chinese characters through 
their Traditional Chinese counterparts, to their Clerical script representations, and sometimes even as far 
back as Seal script or even Bronze or Oracle bone inscriptions which represent the earliest forms of writing of 
the ancient Chinese. 
The evolution of the Chinese character set as a device for documenting and transcribing spoken languages in 
the Far East (as juxtaposed with the more precise alphabetic systems of writing that were adopted by the 
West, the majority of which are believed to have derived from the Phoenician alphabet) is not only an artifact 
of the longstanding and continuous evolution of the writing system itself, but also again reflects the 
underlying requirement of the written language to continuously support a wide variety of spoken languages 
by the various tribes, populations and civilizations that were incorporated into imperialistic China at various 
stages in its social and political development throughout its history - over the course of some five thousand 
years.  This provides for a challenge in translating, again really transliterating, into modern Western European 
languages but also provides a unique window into the minds of the ancient Chinese peoples that used these 
archaic and more primitive forms of writing, and even to some extent provides a window into pre-historical, 
i.e. before the evolution of advanced systems of writing, mindset. 
These unique features of written Chinese while leaves us with a very complex and notoriously difficult 
transliteration challenge into modern Western languages, nonetheless it can in some cases provide us with 
unique insights into what these symbols actually meant to the ancient Chinese authors who used them, i.e. 
what they actually might have "symbolized".  So although the ancient Chinese forms of writing are 
undoubtedly less specific than their counterparts to the West, and of course do not lend themselves to a 
simple direct translation in many cases, they do nonetheless - at least as far as the ancient classical texts are 
concerned - provide a platform for communicating a much more open and far-reaching set of ideas that in 
some cases reach as far back as pre-historical China.  These characteristics are unique to the Chinese system 
of writing and while they provide again for some very interesting transliteration challenges, do again 
nonetheless in some cases yield greater insight into the ancient belief systems of the pre-historic peoples 
from which the classical Chinese civilization evolved from. 
Adding to the complexities and subtleties of the translation of ancient Chinese forms of writing, most 
especially ancient Chinese into modern Western European languages that are based upon the Roman and 
Latin alphabet, we do not find anywhere near the same type of semantic clarity - punctuation, verb tense and 
sentence construction for example - that we have come to expect in our modern Western languages, or even 
in classical Latin or Greek.  Furthermore, in many cases, again in particular in some of the classic Chinese 
philosophical literature, symbols, characters or words can have multiple meanings, many of which could be in 
play for a given sentence, passage or verse in a given context.  While this gives the author a lot of power to 
convey ideas and thoughts with a minimal set of characters or words, it nonetheless makes the process of 
translating Chinese, especially Old Chinese in the Classic script, sometimes excruciating difficult where a 
specific set of characters, word or phrase can have, and may in fact be designed to have, many possible 
renderings or meanings. 
Furthermore, and reflective of the challenges that persist in the "Romanization" of Chinese terms and words 
from the Chinese alphabet into our own, there exist two different approaches to this problem, hence the 
continued need for, and proliferation of, different Romanization transliterations of Chinese words and terms 
into English even today that students of Chinese history and philosophy must familiarize themselves with in 
order to understand what Chinese word, phrase or text the (Western) author is actually referring to.  The first 
method of Romanization of Chinese words that was standardized in the West, and perhaps even still the 
most widely found throughout the literature, is the "Wade-Giles" system.  This system was created in the mid 
19th century and therefore has been in use for some time and dominates most of the Western academic 
literature regarding the ancient Chinese up until the last few decades, where it has begun to be replaced by a 
more modernized version of Romanization called the "Pinyin" system.  This system was created by the 
Chinese government in the 1950s and was adopted by the ISO (International Organization for 
Standardization) in 1982 and is generally used in almost all modern academic literature, at least in the last 
twenty years or so.  One still finds references of terms using the old Wade-Giles form however, and in order 
to properly wade through materials on ancient Chinese history and theo-philosophy, one must be familiar for 
the most part with Chinese terms in both systems of transliteration .

As a specific illustration of the challenges presented by the existence of two different methods of 
Romanization of Chinese words, take for example the name of the famous ancient philosopher Lǎozǐ (Pinyin), 
or alternatively in the more familiar Wade-Giles form, Lao-tzu.  For most of the twentieth century, his famous 
work was transliterated into English using the old Wade-Giles form, i.e. the Tao Te Ching which is how the 
work is predominantly known to the Western reader.  The title of the work however has now been replaced 
in almost all of the modern academic literature with the Pinyin Romanization form, i.e. the Dàodé Jīng or 
Daodejing.  We confront the same issue with the Chinese classic the I Ching (Wade-Giles) versus the Pinyin 
form Yìjīng as another example.  The former Romanization approaches represented by the Wade-Giles 
method, e.g. the Tao Te Ching and I Ching, in all likelihood represent terms that the reader is most familiar 
with, reflective of the fact that they are the more widely used terms even today outside of academic circles.  
The student of ancient Chinese history and philosophy is therefore confronted with the very unique problem 
of having to familiarize themselves with both forms of Romanization as there are still many works that 
continue to be relevant in the study of ancient Chinese history and philosophy use the old Wade-Giles 
system, and these forms of Chinese words are again the most familiar to the Western reader as they have 
been used for the longest amount of time and are the most pervasive in the literature.  Meanwhile again 
almost all modern academic (properly) use the Pinyin method of transliteration, sometimes not including the 
reference to the old Wade-Giles forms of the words or titles of the text.  This for example makes it much 
more challenging to search and find digitally certain ancient Chinese words or texts in their Romanized form 
as compared with ancient Greek literature for example which have had standard Romanized forms for many 
centuries or of course ancient Roman/Latin words or names of text which require no form of Romanization at 
all.  This is unique challenge that is presented to the student of the ancient Chinese intellectual and 
philosophical traditions and is a byproduct of the distinctive and altogether unique nature of their system of 
writing, language, and worldview in fact, relative to ours in the West.
As a further and more illustrative example of the translational difficulties and insights when dealing with 
specific passages and words from ancient Chinese texts, let's look at two translations from two different 
groups of scholars of the famed Dàodé Jīng, one of the earliest and most influential of the ancient Chinese 
philosophical texts attributed to Lǎozǐ, traditionally accepted to have been compiled sometime in the 6th 
century BCE and the foundational treatise of Daoist philosophy.  We look at here specifically at verse/chapter 
42 which is one of the most oft quoted and infamous of passages from the Dàodé Jīng dealing with 
cosmogony, or universal creation.
The first translation is from Robert G. Henricks, Professor Emeritus of Religion at Dartmouth who specializes 
in ancient Chinese philosophical research (Sinology) from 1989, some 15 years after the discovery of 
Mawangdui Silk Texts which included among other things newly discovered versions of the Dàodé Jīng which 
greatly expanded our understanding of the manuscript and textual tradition that surrounded this classic 
work.  His translation is smooth and elegant and illustrates the poetic and lyric nature that was no doubt 
intended in the original text.  
Like most texts from classical antiquity however, it was transcribed not only to capture and document the 
longstanding oral tradition from which it derived, but in fact, perhaps as byproduct of the transcription itself, 
established some of the core conceptual metaphysical and philosophical underpinnings, from a linguistic 
perspective, that have now come to form the basis of Daoist philosophy.   

The Way gave birth to the One;
The One gave birth to the Two;
The Two gave birth to the Three;
And the Three gave birth to the ten thousand things [wànwù].
The ten thousand things carry Yīn on their backs and wrap their arms around Yáng.

Through the blending of ch'i [qì] they arrive at a state of harmony.
The things that are hated by the whole world
Are to be orphaned, widowed, and have no grain.
Yet kings and dukes take these as their names.
Thus with all things - some are increased by taking away;
While some are diminished by adding on.

Therefore, what other men teach, 
I will also consider and then teach to others.
Thus, "The strong and violent do not come to a natural end."
I will take this as the father of my studies. 

The next translation we review as a point of comparison comes from Roger T. Ames, Professor of Chinese 
Philosophy from the University of Hawaii and editor of the journal Philosophy East and West along with David 
L. Hall Professor of Philosophy from the University of Texas El Paso.  Their translation was published in 2003 
after a further discovery of "Bamboo texts" known as the Guodian Chu Slips in 1993 which included among 
other things an even older version of the Dàodé Jīng than had been previously known that contains some 
significant departure from the  "standard", "received" version of the text, shedding light on the textual 
transmission of ancient Chinese works in general and speaking specifically to the various versions of the 
Dàodé Jīng that must have been in circulation in the first few centuries after the text was initially transcribed.
The Guodian Chu Slip versions of the Dàodé Jīng include some differences not only in some characters that 
were used relative to the more standard, orthodox version, but also even a different chapter ordering than 
the "received" versions of the texts. 

Way-making (dao) gives rise to continuity,
Continuity gives rise to difference, 
Difference gives rise to plurality,
And plurality gives rise to the manifold of everything that is happening (wànwù).

Everything carries Yīn on its shoulders and Yáng in its arms
And blends these vital energies (qì) together to make them harmonious (he).

There is nothing in the world disliked more
Than the thought of being friendless, unworthy, and inept,
And yet kings and dukes use just such terms to refer to themselves.
For things, sometimes less is more,
And sometimes, more is less.

Thus, as for what other people are teaching,
I will think about what they have to say, and then teach it to others.

For example: "Those who are coercive and violent do not meet their natural end" -
I am going to take this statement as my precept. 

Irrespective of the very interesting and cosmological and metaphysical content reflected in the above 
passage, what should immediately strike the reader is that if one were to read the two translations 
independent of each other, without knowing that they come from the same "textual tradition" surrounding 
the Dàodé Jīng, i.e. the same work basically, one could easily conclude that the translations were from two 
different works entirely.  Interpreting what the passage means then, or the meaning that the ancient author 
is trying to convey, and how this passage fits into the philosophical tradition and milieu from whence it 
originated, and in turn comparing the underlying philosophical content with other extant ancient textual 
traditions, becomes a very difficult and complex problem indeed.  A problem which is again unique to the 
study of ancient Chinese philosophy.
What that leaves us with, at least in the Western academic tradition with our reliance on, our dependence 
and assumption upon, "philosophy" as a written, coherent and logically sound belief system that explains the 
natural world and mankind's place within it, and that also has some sense of semantic clarity which permits 
some sense of definitional transference into modern English that allows to connect various ancient terms, 
words and ideas throughout the evolution of the philosophical tradition as a whole as well as into modern 
Western European philosophical parlance, is a bit of a conundrum really.  What we want to do, what we're 
inclined to do in studying the Chinese philosophical tradition in antiquity, is to attempt to parse form the 
ancient texts a cosmological, metaphysical and ultimately theo-philosophical belief system that maps 
somehow onto modern metaphysical and philosophical conceptions, even if these conceptions have ancient 
theo-philosophical counterparts - i.e. analogous to what has been done with the Greco-Roman theo-
philosophical traditions which given it's straight lineage from Greek to Latin to English provides for greater 
insight into the underlying worldview, the underlying meaning as it were, of the ancient authors who wrote 
the definitive theo-philosophical works in question.  This is a task of a very different order when studying the 
ancient philosophical works of the Chinese however.
Given the predominance of so many disparate and competing cultures and societies that existed from say 
4000 BCE to 500 CE in the geographic region that has come to be known as China today, the various 
languages, cultures and belief systems were synthesized, integrated and sometimes altogether destroyed or 
totally assimilated in various phases and by various dynastic cultures as they slowly consolidated the vast 
regions and territories which later came to be known as the Chinese Empire - first with the pre-historic Xia 
Dynasty established by the Yu the Great, then to the famed Shāng Dynasty, then on to the Zhou Dynasty 
which is when most of the Chinese Classics we know today were first written down, to the Qin Dynasty which 
consolidated the Chinese empire after the Warring States Period, then into the Han Dynasty where Confucian 
philosophy was officially adopted by the state and the period of Chinese antiquity basically comes to an end.  
Each of these dynastic rulers drew more or less from the varying philosophical traditions to not only guide 
but in some sense legitimatize their rule, i.e. the so-called Mandate of Heaven, and what evolved alongside 
this cultural expansion, synthesis, assimilation and expansion was their system of writing that had to be 
extraordinarily flexible, broad based and inclusive to encompass the various languages and ideologies which 
assimilated into classically "Chinese" culture.  
Many languages were and continue to be spoken in China, and all of these languages needed to be codified, 
written, transcribed in a single written form, and yet the writing system still had to incorporate and assimilate 
the various textual and written traditions that harkened back to Bronze Age China - the beginnings of which 
are captured on first on tortoise shells and ox bones - Oracle Bone script and the slightly more advanced form 
of script found on Bronze artifacts referred to as Bronze script.  This system then in turn became more 
advanced and is found in the archeological records on Bamboo and Silk and is commonly referred to as Seal 
script, which was then followed by the development of a more sophisticated and advanced (and in turn 
complex) system of writing called Clerical script which forms the basis of Traditional Chinese which are still in 
use in China and many other countries in the East today.
The scriptural tradition (not scriptural with the sacred connotations we are used to in the West but scriptural 
in the sense that the ideas are written down) evolved alongside the culture and socio-political evolution right 
from the beginning, providing for a framework of continuous (written) linguistic heritage that is unique to the 
Far East.  But at the same time it does not lend itself to the sort of logical and semantic precision that we are 
accustomed to seeing and leveraging when we analyze ancient Western philosophical works.  This is a very 
unique and sometimes frustrating problem when studying the ancient Chinese theo-philosophical 
development, particularly when approaching the intellectual developments from a classical Western 
academic mindset.  So while the spoken language family of the people of China typically falls in the Sino-
Tibetan language family, part of the language tree that has many diverse siblings and offspring linguistically 
and phonetically speaking, the written language dates back to the dawn of civilization in the Far East, and 
slowly incorporated various symbols from different sub-cultures over time as they were assimilated into 
Chinese culture as a whole, and therefore the Chinese were in fact almost forced to keep a more primitive 
linguistic structure, one which is quite foreign to the phonetically driven alphabet systems we are so used to 
working with in the West.
This unbroken linguistic and cultural lineage however, has supported and fundamentally reflects, a certain 
level of cultural open mindedness and inclusivity.  The writing system had to be inclusive and far reaching in 
order to support the assimilation and consolidation of the various languages that were spoken in ancient 
China, and as a result, their system of writing had to incorporate certain symbols which reflected a certain, 
specific given meaning, more or less, and may or may not have a phonological counterpart (how that word 
sounds).  In this system, semantic and ideological clarity is yielded for linguistic flexibility and this 
characteristic of the Chinese (written) language has both its strengths (in term of flexibility) and weaknesses 
(in terms of lack of clarity), depending upon one's perspective.  This context and associated linguistic 
attributes must be taken into account when trying to understand the true meaning and import being 
conveyed by the ancient authors, authors whose works survive for the most part in some of the oldest forms 
of the Chinese language and were attempting to transcribe and capture living and breathing oral traditions 
that reached even further back into Chinese antiquity.  
It is interesting to note that the view from the Far East with respect to how they interpret their original theo-
philosophical works - like Lǎozǐ's Dàodé Jīng or the Confucian Analects for example - stands in fairly stark 
contrast to the more dogmatic interpretive theological tradition that is such a hallmark of the West - the 
Abrahamic religious traditions in particular with their strict interpretation of scripture and unwavering belief 
in the words of their respective prophets and their "divine" revelation.  It is quite odd in fact that with our 
cultural history in the West that has virtually reinvented systems of writing every 700 years or so, that such 
credence and divinitive powers have been given to the various texts and words of the various prophets - i.e. 
the Bible or the Qurʾān for example - while a linguistic tradition like that of the Chinese that has essentially 
remained fairly constant over the course of millennia and has systematically absorbed symbols and 
phonemes from a broad range of peoples within its geographic borders, still remains quite flexible with 
respect to interpretation of, and fundamental weight applied to, the actual words and symbols that are used 
to convey the meaning of the ancient Chinese philosophers which provide the theo-philosophical basis of 
their culture even today.