
One of the best indications of the influence of Socrates on the development of Western philosophy, what the 
Hellenes, or Greeks, termed philosophia, his ideas being primarily represented by the writings of his best 
known pupil Plato, is the more modern delineation of philosophical systems into Pre-Socratic philosophy to 
the philosophical and metaphysical systems of belief that came after Plato, marked most notably by 
Aristotelianism and Neo-Platonism among other philosophical systems.  In other words, in terms of the 
evolution of what the ancients termed "philosophy", which provides the basis for all of the branches of 
knowledge that today we would categorize as Science, Biology, Ethics, Social Science or Political Philosophy, 
and even Psychology, current historians and scholars basically divide philosophical history into Pre-Socratic, 
Platonic, and Aristotelian, and then virtually everything that came after them as represented by the works of 
Aquinas, Descartes, Kant, and Newton among others. 
Socrates (469 - 399 BCE) was born in Athens circa 470 BCE to a modest family but consistent with all 
Athenian males in the 5th century BCE however, he was given an education and taught to read and write, and 
was required to serve the city in various public and military faculties.  Before his days as a wandering 
philosopher in Athens, Socrates is known to have served valiantly in the Athenian military, having fought 
bravely in several battles against the Spartans during the Peloponnesian War (431 - 404 BCE).  It is said that 
in the battle of Potidaea (432 BCE) for example, he saved the life of the famed Athenian general Alcibiades, 
with whom he is said to have had a very close relationship with (and perhaps was even romantically involved 
with) and through which his association contributed to his being put to death by the Athenian state in 399 
BCE. 
Although Socrates (471 - 399 BCE) did not author any works himself, his teachings and many of the details 
surrounding his death do survive in the accounts and writings of his students, most notably Plato (428 - 348 
BCE) of course, but also Xenophon (431 - 354 BCE), as well as in indirect accounts and references in the 
works of other semi contemporary Greek authors such as the Greek satirical playwright Aristophanes (445 - 
385 BCE)  .  Socrates life's end is marked by his execution by Greek authorities for, at least according to 
Plato, corrupting the minds of youth and challenging the legitimacy of the gods as well as the established 
authority of the aristocracy of Greek society of the day.  Both Plato and Xenophon wrote works describing 
the last days of Socrates and the trial specifically, where Socrates attempts to defend his position as simply a 
seeker of wisdom and man of virtue, almost enticing his accusers to sentence him to death rather than banish 
him to some foreign land. 
Socrates then personifies what we conceive of today as the prototypical classical philosopher, despite the 
contributions of the intellectuals and thinkers that came before him.  However, what the ancients considered 
philosophy and what we consider philosophy today, and in turn metaphysics which was a term first used by 
Aristotle (meaning literally "after" or "beyond" indicating that Metaphysics should be studied after Physics), 
are conceptually similar but at the same time very different things.  The ancient Greeks devised and 
understood the term philosophy, the first use of which is attested and attributed to Pythagoras, covered a 
much broader range of topics and branches of thought than the modern conception of the term.  
Plato's works, in particular his earlier works, are written in a form of literary prose referred to as Socratic 
Dialogue, named as such not only due to the fact that Socrates is a prominent character and voice of the 
philosophical tenets which Plato's puts forth, but also due to the fact that it is typically assumed, particularly 
with respect to his earlier dialogues, that the philosophical positions that he argues for are presumed to have 
originated with Socrates himself.   But outside of second hand accounts, we have no direct works from 
Socrates so for the most part we know of Socrates and his philosophical beliefs and metaphysics through the 
words of Plato.  These are important backdrop and contextual items that must be kept in mind when looking 
at Plato's works and discerning what his "philosophy" truly was, and how much of it was his interpretation of 
Socrates and how much of it was his own workings and reformulations of the teachings which he presumably 
received from Socrates himself.  
It must be kept in mind, when looking at and reviewing the authors of Plato and Xenophon in particular who 
both wrote what are considered to be direct accounts of the last days of Socrates, that the political backdrop 
was a time of war, a war that affected the entire Greek realm at the time.  The Peloponnesian War was the 
great conflict between Athens and her empire and the Peloponnesian League led by Sparta at the end of the 
5th century BC (431 to 401 BC), the termination of which marked the end of the golden age of Athens, after 
the loss of which was relegated to a secondary city-state in the classical antiquity.  
This conflict raised many questions as to the nature of political systems in general to the great thinkers of the 
day, as Sparta's form of government differed in many respects to that of Athens, and given the war that had 
such a significant impact on all of Ancient Greece and its bordering city-states at the time, much of the 
philosophical works of Plato, as well as Aristotle in fact, analyzed the competing socio-political systems of the 
day and proffered up opinions, philosophical and otherwise, upon which system of government was the best.  
It was from this socio-political self-analysis and introspection, stemming from the great perils and destructive 
force of war, that democracy in its current form was forged. 
Therefore, the role of the state, the exploration into the ideal form of government, and the role of the 
philosopher within the state, topics that would not be classically consider as philosophical inquiries today, are 
in fact the main themes that run through Plato's Republic, arguably one of his most lasting and prolific works.  
In this text, Plato explores the various forms of government prevalent in ancient Greek society and 
specifically delves not into the meaning of justice and virtue (arête).  He also, through the narrative of 
Socrates, explores the role of the philosopher in society, even going so far as to speak of the utopian form of 
government being one that is led by the "philosopher-king". 
In a broader sense, The Republic portrays Socrates, along with other various members of the Athenian and 
foreign elite, discussing the meaning of excellence or virtue, i.e. arête, within a socio-political context, 
examining whether or not the just man is happier than the unjust man by comparing and contrasting existing 
regimes and political systems, as well as discussing the role of the philosopher in society.  All of these themes 
must have crystallized in Plato's mind and life after the death of his beloved teacher Socrates given the socio-
political context within which he was put to death.  Plato's concern with the ideal city-state, reflected in the 
title of the work that was given to it by later historians and compilers of his work on this topic, i.e. Republic, 
focused on the value and strengths and weaknesses of democracy as it existed in Athens, again an important 
topic of the day given the broad impact of the Peloponnesian War on the world of ancient Greece at the time 
and the competing forms of government each side of the conflict espoused.  
Another example of the importance of the state in the early philosophical works of the ancient Greeks comes 
from Aristotle's Politics.  Here Aristotle continues Plato's exploration into various forms of government and 
their pros and cons, looking specifically at the government of Sparta in one passage, describing it as some 
combination of monarchy, oligarchy and public assembly/senate of sorts, all of which were combined to 
balance power, in many respects similar to the balance of power as reflected in the House, the Senate and 
the office of the President in the United States today.  


Some, indeed, say that the best constitution is a combination of all existing forms, and they praise the 
Lacedaemonian [Spartan] because it is made up of oligarchy, monarchy, and democracy, the king forming the 
monarchy, and the council of elders the oligarchy while the democratic element is represented by the Ephors; 
for the Ephors are selected from the people. Others, however, declare the Ephoralty to be a tyranny, and find 
the element of democracy in the common meals and in the habits of daily life. At Lacedaemon, for instance, the 
Ephors determine suits about contracts, which they distribute among themselves, while the elders are judges of 
homicide, and other causes are decided by other magistrates. 

So government then, its role and purpose, as well as the role of the individual citizen, were clearly very 
important topics of the early Greek philosophers and you'd be hard pressed to believe that to at least some 
extent they influenced the development of various political systems in their day.  But their most lasting 
contribution arguably was their devotion to the pursuit of knowledge and truth for their own sake, as 
opposed to the pursuit of knowledge to establish the legitimacy of authority and the ruling class which had 
been the pattern that had existed for centuries if not millennia before them, as well as their creation of 
institutions of learning from which this new field of study could be practiced and taught, passing its tenets 
down to later generations not only orally but through a written tradition for further enquiry and analysis by 
subsequent students, as reflected in the works of Plato and Aristotle which survive to this day.

While the philosophical doctrines of Socrates are believed to be reflected in Plato's earlier works and the 
philosophy of Plato himself are gleaned from his Middle and Late dialogues, the works of his most prolific 
student Aristotle explored topics and subjects which we today would consider fall under the category of 
Philosophy, but also covered topics such as theology, ethics, the underlying principles of logic and reason 
(dialectic), as well as what we today would call metaphysics, or the study of the nature of reality and 
knowledge itself.  All of these topics fell under what the ancients termed philosophy, what the Greeks termed 
philosophia, or more specifically what Aristotle referred to as epistêmê, which is typically translated as 
"sciences" but is the plural of the Greek word for "knowledge".  
Plato was by far the most prominent of Socrates's disciples and was a prolific author, all of his writings 
however coming after the death of his mentor and therefore at best represent at least one generation 
removed of the actual life and times of the great martyr who as the story goes sacrificed his life in the name 
of truth and knowledge.  Plato lived and wrote in the latter part of the 4th and early part of the third century 
BC (circa 424 to 327 BC), and in his later life founded the Academy of Athens, the first known institution of 
higher learning in the Western world that persisted until the beginning of the first century BCE, the same 
Academy from which Aristotle was schooled.  Thirty-six dialogues have been ascribed to Plato, and they cover 
a range of topics such as love, virtue, ethics, and the role of the philosopher in society.
Plato however is named specifically in the Apology as being present at the day of Socrates's the trial 
however, as well as is called out in the Phaedo as being one of the close followers of Socrates who could not 
make it on the day of his execution because he was ill, so it is safe to say that a very close relationship existed 
- at least from Plato's perspective - between Plato and Socrates and that perhaps some of the depictions of 
Socrates by Plato in his dialogues are representative of first-hand accounts so to speak.  However, taken as a 
whole though, what we know of Socrates - from whose example and teachings clearly greatly influenced 
Plato who in turn was the teacher of Aristotle, arguably two of the most influential Western philosophers of 
all time - as understood through the words of Plato at least, must be looked at least somewhat skeptically for 
it is surely through rose colored glasses, through the writings of Plato and Xenophanes in particular, that he 
historical figure of Socrates is known by the modern reader and scholar primarily.
While little is known of Plato's early life according it is believed that he was born to a wealthy aristocratic 
family in Greece on the island of Aegina just south of Athens toward the end of the 5th century BCE (428/427 
BCE).  As most aristocratic Athenian youth he was well educated and according to Diogenes Laertius he was 
instructed in the arts of grammar (reading and writing), music, painting and gymnastics and, not surprisingly, 
was a very good student.  It is also held that he excelled as a wrestler and that he competed, and did well, in 
the Isthmian Games, one of the Panhellenic Games of Ancient Greece that was held on off years of the famed 
Olympic Games.   His introduction to philosophy supposedly started as a student of Cratylus, a student and 
follower of Heraclitus and was also a prominent figure, and title, of one of Plato's middle dialogues. 
It is commonly assumed that the doctrines and philosophical positions that Plato puts forth in his dialogues, 
particular from his Middle and Late Period, represent his philosophical position more or less, and many of the 
characters and (alternative) points of view and positions that are explored in his dialogues represent at least 
to some degree the varying philosophical positions and views that were prevalent by the various teachers 
and intellectuals contemporaries or predecessors of the era within which Plato wrote.  For example, 
Anaxagoras, Parmenides, and Cratylus. are all characters in his dialogues that are used as foils within his 
works to represent, and ultimately refute, their various philosophical tenets and systems of belief.  
Furthermore, it is believed that in almost all cases Plato's views and positions are presented through the 
character of Socrates, who is a prominent figure in virtually all of Plato's dialogues and is the voice through 
which Plato expresses his philosophical views, along with the arguments and reasons (logos) to back up his 
positions.
Plato's intention then, no doubt inspired by his teacher Socrates who was sentenced to death for "impiety", 
or questioning the reality of the old gods and traditions which were such an important part of the Greek 
culture and society, was not necessarily to reject the old traditions outright, but certainly to question them 
and place them within a more rational and coherent intellectual framework, a framework which still reflected 
an underlying belief and faith in the gods and mythology of pre-historic man, but attempted to distinguish 
between faith and knowledge (science), and provide more rational underpinnings for morality and ethics as a 
whole, and even systems of government to which we still owe him a great debt.
With respect to the modern interpretation of the evolution of Plato's philosophy, modern scholars typically 
divide Plato's works, his dialogues (so called due to the style of prose that Plato used throughout, a 
conversational like setting between two or more characters) into three categories - Early, Middle and Late.  
His Early dialogues, are presumed to reflect the teachings of Socrates and primarily deal with ethics, morality 
and the leading of a "good" and virtuous life.  These include the Charmides, Crito, Euthydemus, Euthyphro, 
Gorgias, Hippias Major, Hippias Minor, Ion, Laches, Lysis, and Protagoras.  His Middle dialogues, or dialogues 
from his "Middle period", which are best represented by the Phaedo, Cratylus, Symposium, Republic, and 
Phaedrus are believed to represent Plato's first foray into the exploration of his own philosophical doctrines, 
primarily constructed upon his theory of forms.   
His later works, representing the most mature state of his philosophy and the most elaborate and stylistic of 
language are the Sophist, Statesman, the Timaeus, Critias, Philebus, and what is believed to be his last work, 
Laws.   It is in this Middle Period that we see Plato develop his predominantly idealistic views on the nature 
of reality, the ontological precedence of ideas over matter upon which his theory of forms ultimately rests, 
and upon which he posited the fundamental reality of ethics and virtue as eternally existent "things" in and of 
themselves, i.e. forms, and in turn the role of dialectic and reasoning (logos) in establishing their "reality", 
reality in the sense that they were not subject to change.  It is from the philosophical development as 
reflected in his works in this Middle Period that Plato establishes the rational ground for the eternal truths of 
virtue, ethics and ultimately the Good, and then in perhaps his most famous and influential work the Republic 
where he describes the importance of the role of philosophy and in turn the philosopher, i.e. he who pursued 
wisdom, i.e. sophia, for its own sake, on the structure of the ideal state.  
All of Plato's dialogues were exactly that, the documentation and exploration of various ideas and topics as 
love, friendship, virtue, morality etc., via conversation and argumentation between two or more characters 
where these various ideas, what came to represent Plato's "philosophy"  were approached and described 
from various intellectual points of view in order to arrive at some sense of truth or essence of the topic at 
hand.  His dialogues are typically structured as conversations between two or more persons where basic 
hypothesis or theories are put forth and then in turn criticized followed by the related defense of said 
theories, with Socrates being the predominant figure in virtually all of his works.  This form of reasoning, for 
which Plato is perhaps best known for, came to be known as dialectic, i.e. the exploration of theoretical and 
metaphysical concepts by the use of a narrative or dialogue between various (fictitious or historical) 
characters, where various philosophical principles.  
The format that Plato uses throughout all of his works is one of the presentation of differing points of view of 
an argument by various characters in his dialogues in order to explore, and ultimately conclude, various 
philosophical points.  The common thread throughout these dialogues is the supremacy of reason, the use of 
logic and argument (dialectic), to establish various points of view as well as basic philosophical and 
metaphysical positions, upon which what we know today as Platonic philosophy is presented to the modern 
reader.  This unique characteristic of Plato's writings, the format within which he explores and presents his 
ideas, in and of itself had lasting effects on the development of Western thought, and teaching of philosophy 
in general, that lasted well throughout the middle ages, continuing to be used as the means of teaching to a 
greater or lesser extent as it evolved into its more modern form which came to be known as Scholasticism 
which was used as the teaching methodology for many of the earliest universities that cropped from the 11th 
century onwards up through the Enlightenment Era. 
While Socrates plays a significant role in many of Plato's dialogues, and although it's not clear to what extent 
the narratives that Plato speaks of are historically accurate, Plato does make use of a variety of names, places 
and events in his dialogues attributed specifically to Socrates and others that lend his dialogues a sense of 
authenticity, be they historically accurate or not .  So although it is safe to assume that the life and 
teachings of Socrates formed much of the basis of many of the philosophical constructs that Plato covers in 
his extant work, particularly in his Early dialogues, just as in the analysis of any ancient literature or culture, 
the historical and political context within which the works were authored must be considered when trying to 
determine their import and message.
Taken as a whole however, given the philosophical and metaphysical nature of the topics Plato explores in his 
extant work, historical accuracy isn't necessarily an imperative for him.  In other words, Plato is not 
attempting to provide any sort of historical narrative but attempting to lay out alternative points of view on a 
variety of topics to yield knowledge and truth regarding esoteric topics that had hitherto been unexplored.  In 
other words, given the purpose of Plato's dialogues and extant work, the veracity of the individual beliefs of 
the persona in his dialogues, or even the accuracy of events which he describes, are of less importance and 
relevance than the topics which he discusses as well as the means by which he explores the topics - namely 
dialectic or dialogue form.  
It can be argued however that Plato believed, and this view was inherited to a certain degree by Aristotle, 
that the most direct and powerful way to arrive at truth or the essence of an abstract topic was through 
dialogue or argument, and so almost of all of his writings were drafted in this form.  From Plato's perspective, 
it was only through dialectic, through the bantering and discussion of varying points of view by several 
individuals, that the truth or wisdom of a certain topic could be revealed - if in fact the true nature of Truth 
on the topic at hand could indeed actually be established, hence the skeptic nature of many of the later 
interpreters of his work.  This form of writing and exposition by Plato can be viewed as evidence of Plato's 
insistence that pure, absolute truth is unknowable, but can be explored or better understood by evaluating 
all sides of an issue or topic and using reason and logic to arrive at understanding, even if absolute truth is 
elusive.
But again, when trying to discern or determine "Plato's philosophy", or Platonism, in its early stages as it is 
sometimes referred to, it is important to remember that perhaps Plato's most lasting contribution to 
Western thought was not necessarily the philosophy that he presented, the one which he assume he learned 
from Socrates, but the means by which he presented and explored these philosophical principles - through 
dialogue and debate, i.e. dialectic - a method which was much more profound and lasting in and of itself 
than the doctrines and belief systems that we infer to be contained or found in Plato's works and a method 
which rested on the supremacy of reason, i.e. logos, and argument and logic to a great extent, over myth or 
blind faith.  A constant theme in all of Plato's dialogues then is the method of teaching itself, a method which 
spoke to the power of the mental faculty of man more so than any of his predecessors, predecessors which 
had for the most part relied on poetry and mythology as tools of exposition and explanation (and to some 
extent even mysticism in the sense of direct divine revelation and the absence of reason or logic from which 
poetry can be seen to have derived) and the establishment of truth.