
The first systematic treatment of philosophy, and arguably the most influential, in the West can be found in 
works of Plato, in particular in his works the Phaedo, the Republic and the Timaeus which are by most 
accounts the most influential of Plato's works.  Despite his unique approach to philosophy, both in terms of 
his writing style as well as content, Plato nonetheless did not evolve in a vacuum, influenced in no small 
measure by the "poets", Homer and Hesiod standing out of course given their vast influence on Hellenic 
culture and society overall.  Also, from a philosophical perspective, we see clear traces of some of the 
philosophical tenets of some of the so-called "Pre-Socratics", Heraclitus and Pythagoras in particular.  We 
also see traces and hints of the mystery cults as well, with Orphism standing out but Plato is clearly no 
stranger to the Eleusinian Mysteries either.
Plato does not altogether dismiss the mythic and mystic traditions that were mainstays in Hellenic culture 
during classical Greece when Plato lived and wrote, and he most certainly does not entirely dismiss the 
relevance or existence of the gods per se upon which these traditions rested.   He nonetheless however 
breaks free from these characteristically Hellenic "religions", if we use that term broadly, expanding upon 
some of the philosophical traditions that came before him and for the most part relegating myth and mystery 
to the poets and mystics.  For with Plato, no doubt with his teacher Socrates as well, we see a dramatic shift 
away from the ancient wisdom that lay buried in myth and mystery, and a pivot toward reason and logic - 
logos and dialectic - as tools for determining the true nature of reality and knowledge - the domain of the 
philosopher - characteristics that in turn become trademarks of Hellenic philosophical tradition itself.
At the time that Plato started his philosophical endeavors, the Greek society and culture at large was imbued 
with a variety of mystery cults traditions such as the Orphism and the Cult of Dionysus which were both close 
cousins to the mystery cult traditions presided over by Egyptian priests with whom both Pythagoras and Plato 
are both to have believed to have studied with.  Furthermore, Greek society at the time was heavily 
influenced by a lively mythic and poetic tradition (hymnos) as represented by the prevalence and popularity 
of the works of Homer, Hesiod and Orpheus which were shrouded in a world of mystery and tales of heroes 
from deep antiquity, journeys to the underworld (Hades), and epic battles of the gods from which the race of 
man ultimately descended.  Plato was influenced by all of these sociological and theological forces and even 
if he didn't reject them outright (at least not in his published works), he attempted to place these ancient 
belief systems into a much richer intellectual framework from which philosophy, what we today call science, 
was from then on pursued as its own discipline.
One, if not the, central tenet of Plato's philosophy is the fundamental reality and ontological primacy of what 
came to be known as forms or ideas , a theory which is introduced in the Phaedo as an argument for the 
immortality of the Soul and is explored in much more detail in the Republic, a dialogue whose central theme 
is the nature of justice and its relationship to happiness, the Greek eudaimonia, and its role in the 
construction and management of the ideal state.   Plato's idealism, to use a more modern term to describe 
his theory of forms, not only provided the epistemological foundations of his philosophy as a whole, but also 
in turn provided the intellectual foundation of his ethics and socio-political philosophy which was based upon 
the necessity and value of virtue and wisdom, i.e. sophia, concepts which he held were realities in and of 
themselves which were the goals of philosophical inquiry, just as justice and happiness should be the goals of 
the state. 
Perhaps the most famous illustration of Plato's idealism, his theory of forms, and the role of the Good as the 
source of all things, the penultimate idea as it were, is summed up in the Allegory of the Cave from what is 
believed to be the most mature work of his middle period, namely the Republic.   In this graphic metaphor, 
Socrates describes a group of people who have been chained to a wall in a cave for their whole lives, a chain 
which does not allow their heads to move and therefore they can only see what is directly in front of their 
field of vision.  There is a fire behind them, which casts shadows upon images and forms that are moved 
behind the chained souls on the top of a wall, much like a puppet show casts characters across the field of a 
wooden stage.  

"Next," said I, "compare our nature in respect of education and its lack to such an experience as this. Picture 
men dwelling in a sort of subterranean cavern with a long entrance open to the light on its entire width.  
Conceive them as having their legs and necks fettered from childhood, so that they remain in the same spot, 
able to look forward only, and prevented by the fetters from turning their heads.  Picture further the light from 
a fire burning higher up and at a distance behind them, and between the fire and the prisoners and above them 
a road along which a low wall has been built, as the exhibitors of puppet-shows have partitions before the men 
themselves, above which they show the puppets."  "All that I see," he said.  "See also, then, men carrying past 
the wall implements of all kinds that rise above the wall, and human images and shapes of animals as well, 
wrought in stone and wood and every material, some of these bearers presumably speaking and others 
silent." 

So the chained souls can see shadows in front of them, or forms, projected to the wall in front of them off of 
the fire that blazes behind them which they cannot see.  Hence these people know only shadows and forms 
their whole lives, although they believe this to be the one and only reality for they know nothing else.  Such is 
the source and nature of ignorance, for these people know not what they do not know, in much the same 
way as Heraclitus deemed his teachings to be misunderstood by most.

"Then in every way such prisoners would deem reality to be nothing else than the shadows of the artificial 
objects."  "Quite inevitably," he said.  "Consider, then, what would be the manner of the release and healing 
from these bonds and this folly if in the course of nature something of this sort should happen to them:  When 
one was freed from his fetters and compelled to stand up suddenly and turn his head around and walk and to 
lift up his eyes to the light, and in doing all this felt pain and, because of the dazzle and glitter of the light, was 
unable to discern the objects whose shadows he formerly saw, what do you suppose would be his answer if 
someone told him that what he had seen before was all a cheat and an illusion, but that now, being nearer to 
reality and turned toward more real things, he saw more truly?  And if also one should point out to him each of 
the passing objects and constrain him by questions to say what it is, do you not think that he would be at a loss 
and that he would regard what he formerly saw as more real than the things now pointed out to him?"  "Far 
more real," he said. 

Here Plato not only provides the analogy of knowledge, at least the first form of higher knowledge of Forms, 
ideas, in and of themselves as being the true nature, the source of the shadows and images that the chained 
prisoners see on the wall in front of them from the reflection of the fire, but also alludes to the difficult role 
of the philosopher who is trying to illustrate the true nature of reality to those who are bound in chains and 
can see only shadows and reflections of Truth - i.e. Forms and ideas. 

"And if he were compelled to look at the light itself, would not that pain his eyes, and would he not turn away 
and flee to those things which he is able to discern and regard them as in very deed more clear and exact than 
the objects pointed out?"  "It is so," he said.  "And if," said I, "someone should drag him thence by force up the 
ascent which is rough and steep, and not let him go before he had drawn him out into the light of the sun, do 
you not think that he would find it painful to be so haled along, and would chafe at it, and when he came out 
into the light, that his eyes would be filled with its beams so that he would not be able to see even one of the 
things that we call real?"  "Why, no, not immediately," he said.  "Then there would be need of habituation, I 
take it, to enable him to see the things higher up.  And at first he would most easily discern the shadows and, 
after that, the likenesses or reflections in water of men and other things, and later, the things themselves, and 
from these he would go on to contemplate the appearances in the heavens and heaven itself, more easily by 
night, looking at the light of the stars and the moon, than by day the sun and the sun's light."  "Of course." 

If they are released from their intellectual "bondage", the veil of their ignorance removed, and they would 
were to leave the cave itself, and arrive outside and see the sun for the first time, the source of the light of 
the actual shapes and "things" which have their images and shadows reflected on the wall that they have 
seen their whole lives and thought to be "Truth" and "reality", they would for the very first time be 
"illumined" so to speak, and they would finally be able to see things for what they truly are.

"And so, finally, I suppose, he would be able to look upon the sun itself and see its true nature, not by reflections 
in water or phantasms of it in an alien setting, but in and by itself in its own place."  "Necessarily," he said.  
"And at this point he would infer and conclude that this it is that provides the seasons and the courses of the 
year and presides over all things in the visible region, and is in some sort the cause of all these things that they 
had seen." 

Here Plato alludes to the final source and true nature of everything that is mistaken for reality, i.e. the Sun or 
the Good, which represents the final goal, the endpoint as it were, of all intellectual and philosophical pursuit 
- to understand Truth and the source and nature of all that exists.  The Good to Plato is the ultimate idea, the 
source of all Ideas and forms, and from which any conception of anything material is derived.  
In this same passage, Socrates describes the perils of the philosopher who tries to show the true nature of 
reality to those who are bound in the cave and who live in ignorance, going so far as to suggest - as was the 
very case for Socrates himself in fact - that if he were to try and illustrate the true nature of reality to those 
who lived in ignorance not only would he be laughed at but that he also would in fact be killed (517a). 

 
Figure 22: Depiction of Plato's Allegory of the Cave by Cornelis van Haarlem, 1604. 

The philosopher to Plato then is like a person who is freed from this cave, and is let out into the light of the 
sun, where he sees and realizes that everything that he has thought to be real, has only been a shadow of 
truth and reality.  In its simplest interpretation, the Allegory of the Cave can be viewed as outlining and 
defining Plato's belief in the supremacy of forms or ideas over knowledge derived from sensory perception or 
the material world, i.e. his theory of forms.  

The first of his works that most scholars believe lays out the basic framework of Plato's primary philosophical 
tenets is Phaedo, a work which circulated in antiquity under the title of On the Soul.  This work is believed to 
be one of the first works from his Middle Period, and although the narrative takes place on the day that 
Socrates is put to death, linking the dialogue with some of his earlier works which deal with the fate of 
Socrates and "Socratic" philosophy (as distinct from the Platonic philosophy), it nonetheless lays out the basic 
argument for not just the immortality of the Soul, but the ontological supremacy of the world of intelligibles - 
forms and ideas - over the visible or material world of "things" or "objects", i.e. that which is perceived by 
the senses.  The dialogue takes place between several followers and friends of Socrates on the eve of his 
death, a quite dramatic scene and considered to be one of the best and greatest of the literary works 
produced by Plato.  Phaedo is one of the characters of the dialogue and he is the narrator of the tale and is 
supposedly present on the day of Socrates death at the place of his imprisonment and therefore in a position 
to speak on a first-hand basis about the topics and conversations held just before Socrates is put to death.   
Naturally, the question of the nature of the death, whether or not there is anything that persists beyond 
death, and whether or not death itself should be feared, arises, initially posed as to whether or not it is just 
for one to take his own life.  Plato, through Socrates, explains that philosophy is in fact, if anything the study 
of death and dying, the preparation for death as it were, and as such the philosopher should not fear death, 
but welcome it.  Furthermore, Socrates explains that it is not right for one to kill himself for the Soul is owned 
by the gods as he puts it, and as such it would not be right to take it before its time- before "god sends some 
necessity upon him, such as now come upon me" as Socrates puts it  - just as it would not be right to take 
something of someone's else possession without their permission.   This view is challenged however, and it is 
in this context that Plato, again through Socrates, lays out his argument for the immortality of the Soul , 
explaining his sentiment that "I not only do not grieve, but I have great hopes that there is something in store 
for the dead, and, as has been said of old, something better for the good than for the wicked."   The 
argument rests on the belief that death itself is the separation of the Soul from the body, and that the 
philosopher is primarily concerned with the nature of the Soul, and things akin to it, as distinguished from 
things of the world which are associated with the mortal body and hence explaining why the philosopher is 
concerned more with the nature of death than the nature of life as it were.  To Plato, it is this pursuit of 
wisdom, sophia, as an end in and of itself that ultimately defines the philosopher and separates him from the 
masses, and the means by which he can not only prepare himself for death but in turn understand that which 
persists beyond death.  In this pursuit, the senses are not just relegated to secondary importance with 
respect to the attainment or truth or wisdom, but are to be shunned altogether as deceiving. 

For, if pure knowledge is impossible while the body is with us, one of two thing must follow, either it cannot be 
acquired at all or only when we are dead; for then the soul will be by itself apart from the body, but not before.  
And while we live, we shall, I think, be nearest to knowledge when we avoid, so far as possible, intercourse and 
communion with the body, except what is absolutely necessary, and are not filled with its nature, but keep 
ourselves pure from it until God himself sets us free.  And in this way, freeing ourselves from the foolishness of 
the body and being pure, we shall, I think, be with the pure and shall know of ourselves all that is pure, - and 
that is, perhaps, the truth.  For it cannot be that the impure attain the pure.  Such words as these, I think, 
Simmias, all who are rightly lovers of knowledge [philosophers] must say to each other and such must be their 
thoughts.  Do you not agree?"  "Most assuredly, Socrates." 

This idealist conception of knowledge and truth, one which is based upon the distinction between the Soul 
and the body, and of course upon the belief that in fact the soul exists, is not only characteristic of Plato's 
philosophy throughout his works but in fact underpins it in almost all respects.  The notion of purification, 
and the idea that the body itself and its wants and needs are "impure", is a notion which has parallels in the 
Orphic tradition and certainly in the Upanishadic philosophic tradition as well.  To Plato, the senses are 
looked upon as deceiving to a certain extent, or at the least to be relevant to only a lower form of knowledge, 
one which is fundamentally not the pursuit of the lover of wisdom, sophia, i.e. the philosopher.

What I mean is this:  Have the sight and hearing of men any truth in them, or is it true, as the poets are always 
telling us, that we neither hear nor see anything accurately?  And yet if these two physical senses are not 
accurate or exact, the rest are not likely to be, for they are inferior to these.  Do you not think so?"  "Certainly I 
do," he replied.

"Then," said he, "when does the soul attain to truth?  For when it tries to consider anything in company with 
the body, it is evidently deceived by it."  "True."  "In thought, then, if at all, something of the realities becomes 
clear to it?"  "Yes." 


Plato goes on to describe in detail the process by which It is only through the use of pure reason (logos), in 
the realm beyond thought really - ideas and forms - as the only realm within which the highest knowledge 
can be attained, a realm which the Soul subsists in and of itself.  

"But it thinks best when none of these things troubles it, neither hearing nor sight, nor pain nor any pleasure, 
but it is, so far as possible, alone by itself, and takes leave of the body, and avoiding, so far as it can, all 
association or contact with the body, reaches out toward the reality."  "That is true."  "In this matter also, then, 
the soul of the philosopher greatly despises the body and avoids it and strives to be alone by itself?"  
"Evidently."

"Now how about such things as this, Simmias?  Do we think there is such a thing as absolute justice, or not?"  
"We certainly think there is."  "And absolute beauty and goodness."  "Of course."  "Well, did you ever see 
anything of that kind with your eyes?"  "Certainly not," said he.  "Or did you ever reach them with any of the 
bodily senses?  I am speaking of all such things, as size, health, strength, and in short the essence or underlying 
quality of everything.  Is their true nature contemplated by means of the body?  Is it not rather the case that he 
who prepares himself most carefully to understand the true essence of each thing that he examines would 
come nearest to the knowledge of it?"  "Certainly."

"Would not that man do this most perfectly who approaches each thing, so far as possible, with the reason 
alone, not introducing sight into his reasoning nor dragging in any of the other senses along with his thinking, 
but who employs pure, absolute reason in his attempt to search out the pure, absolute essence of things, and 
who removes himself, so far as possible, from eyes and ears, and, in a word, from his whole body, because he 
feels that its companionship disturbs the soul and hinders it from attaining truth and wisdom?  Is not this the 
man, Simmias, if anyone, to attain to the knowledge of reality?"  "That is true as true can be, Socrates," said 
Simmias. 

Here we see Plato describing the means by which this wisdom can be attained, if attainment is possible while 
one is "embodied".  Withdrawing within oneself, taking leave of the body, avoiding any contact or association 
with the body as much as possible, "reaching out toward reality" as he puts it.  This process of what can 
perhaps best be described in this context of the "liberation" of the Soul from the body, or as Plato puts it a 
"reaching out toward the reality" smacks of mysticism and sounds a lot like pratyahara, withdrawal of senses, 
that is fundamental to Yoga.   
Plato further alludes to the specific human faculty by which the knowledge, again wisdom, in this case 
phronēsis which is a more practical variant of the more mystic sophia, can be obtained, i.e. through the use of 
pure reason, or logos.  We find Plato further illustrating this theory of knowledge, i.e. his epistemology, well 
beyond what we would consider that which is bound by pure reason or logic from a modern Western 
intellectual conception however.  Regardless, it most certainly sits above anything having to do with sense 
experience or any knowledge of the material world, in fact again this knowledge is supposed to be avoided by 
the true philosopher who wishes to attain wisdom, i.e. that which is deathless and therefore no fear of death 
itself. 

A key part of Plato's argument for the immortality of the Soul in Phaedo rests on, and starts with, an 
argument for the existence of life and death as different aspects of the same notion of concept which 
underlies the Soul - which he equates with life (animation, animus in the later Roman/Latin philosophical and 
theological tradition) - based upon what might be called the "doctrine of opposites".  That is to say that each 
opposing process or force is not just defined by its opposite but that its essence stems from, originates from, 
its opposing process.  In other words, opposing processes are not just linked because they are "opposite" 
each other, i.e. representative of diametrically opposing processes, but in fact their existence depends upon 
the other and the existence of one is not just predicated, but in fact requires, the existence of the other.  The 
examples he gives are sleeping and waking, increasing and decreasing, cooling and heating, and of course 
ultimately living to dying which is the context within which he uses this premise to again argue for the logical 
existence of the existence of the immortal Soul.

For if generation did not proceed from opposite to opposite and back again, going round, as it were in a circle, 
but always went forward in a straight line without turning back or curving, then, you know, in the end all things 
would have the same form and be acted upon in the same way and stop being generated at all." 

One finds this doctrine of opposites expressed by Heraclitus as well, a philosopher who is believed, at least 
according to Aristotle, to have greatly influenced Plato and certainly this argument in Phaedo seems to point 
squarely in that direction.  In the words of Heraclitus, "Living and dead are potentially the same thing, and so 
too waking and sleeping, and young and old; for the latter revert to the former, and the former in turn to the 
latter."   
It is from a rational deduction based upon this argument of the mutually interdependent reliance of opposing 
forces and states of being that Plato draws, via a reductio ad absurdum argument more or less, that life and 
death are in fact rationally dependent upon each other for their respective existence as concepts or ideas, i.e. 
mutually dependent states of being that ultimately depend upon each other for their very existence.  He 
concludes therefore, that there must in fact precede some sort of life of the Soul before birth, and in turn 
some sort of life for the Soul after death. 
Once this is challenged, Plato (again through the voice of Socrates) goes on to argue for the primordial and 
absolute unchanging and eternal existence of ideas and forms as existing not just in and of themselves (a kind 
of a priori knowledge to use Kant's terminology) but also as representative of the highest form of knowledge 
itself, theorizing that learning is a form of "recollection" as it were, a notion that can be found throughout 
Plato's Early and Middle dialogues.

"Now if we had acquired that knowledge before we were born, and were born with it, we knew before we were 
born and at the moment of birth not only the equal and the greater and the less, but all such abstractions?  For 
our present argument is no more concerned with the equal than with absolute beauty and the absolute good 
and the just and the holy, and, in short, with all those things which we stamp with the seal of absolute in our 
dialectic process of questions and answers; so that we must necessarily have acquired knowledge of all these 
before our birth."  "That is true."

"And if after acquiring it we have not, in each case, forgotten it, we must always be born knowing these things, 
and must know them throughout our life; for to know is to have acquired knowledge and to have retained it 
without losing it, and the loss of knowledge is just what we mean when we speak of forgetting, is it not, 
Simmias?" 

The basic argument here is that in order for us to understand what "beauty", or "goodness", or "equality" is 
and what they mean, we must know it implicitly within the realm of knowledge and understanding where 
these ideas exist, i.e. we must "remember" them, recollect them, because the ideas themselves dwell in a 
realm beyond the physical or sensible world.  That is to say these ideas are a priori, eternal notions or 
concepts and the only way we can truly understand or comprehend them is via the use of a "rational" faculty, 
through an instrument as it were, i.e. the Soul, that rests and dwells in the same intelligible world where 
these notions are resident.  In other words, some element or part of us must be pre-existent to our birth in 
this material form, this body, in order for us to "remember" what these abstract constructs are and in order 
for us to "understand" what they truly mean or signify.  Like can only know like as it is sometimes expressed.   
Plato's theory of forms and his idea of knowledge or understanding, learning in fact, as recollection , goes 
hand in hand with his theory of forms.  These forms are described as the only unchanging, self-existent 
"things", ideas that can be grasped by reason alone (logos).  These characteristics, in Plato's view, make 
forms and ideas the most real of "things", the truest of substances that have immanent and eternal 
existence, i.e. are not subject to change. 

"Let us then," said he, "turn to what we were discussing before. [78d] Is the absolute essence, which we in our 
dialectic process of question and answer call true being, always the same or is it liable to change? Absolute 
equality, absolute beauty, any absolute existence, true being-do they ever admit of any change whatsoever? 
Or does each absolute essence, since it is uniform and exists by itself, remain the same and never in any way 
admit of any change?" 

But this is not just an ethereal and abstract existence where these ideas dwell, but a real place as it were, a 
state of being, to which the mind, and Soul, of the philosopher is predisposed or attentive towards.

"But when the soul [79d] inquires alone by itself, it departs into the realm of the pure, the everlasting, the 
immortal and the changeless, and being akin to these it dwells always with them whenever it is by itself and is 
not hindered, and it has rest from its wanderings and remains always the same and unchanging with the 
changeless, since it is in communion therewith.  And this state of the soul is called wisdom.  Is it not so?" 

The changeless world of forms and ideas is not just the truest and realist of things, a much higher form of 
knowledge, truer form of knowledge given its unchanging and eternal nature, than the knowledge of the 
senses as governed by the body - the body being distinct from the Soul.  The argument is made here not just 
for the existence of forms and ideas, but their equivalence with the Soul, their equivalent realm so to speak 
and the existence of a state of being which Plato refers to as "wisdom", phronēsis, or "practical wisdom", 
which is the ultimate goal and pursuit, the absolute end really, of philosophical pursuit. 
As Socrates is prompted to explain further his reasoning as to why he has come to belief that the Soul lives 
beyond death and is in fact immortal, he narrates to his listeners upon the morning of his death the complete 
intellectual journey he went on to arrive at said conclusion, as to how he ended up concluding that the 
ineligible realm, the realm of ideas and forms, the realm guided by and explored through pure reason alone, 
represented the "most real" of phenomena, i.e. the highest form of knowledge.   He does so by describing his 
foray and exploration into the realm of natural philosophy, what we have come to call Physics (through 
Aristotle's terminology as it has been handed down in the Western intellectual tradition) and his ultimate 
rejection of this domain as the final cause or purpose of that which he considers the basis for reality, or 
experience.  Even after being exposed to the philosophy of Anaxagoras, with whom the nature of Mind 
rested as the eternal principle which pervaded and formed the universe as we know it and experience it, 
Socrates could not conclude that anything pertaining to physical reality, any materialistic or empiricist 
framework, could facilitate or provide the true intellectual foundation for the "true cause" of the universe as 
know and experience it.   
As Socrates narrates this part of his argument in Phaedo, when he confronted this question about the "true" 
nature of existence, a question that could be formulates as something like: "what is the true cause and 
nature of the universe and the world as we know and understand it and what is it that underlies experience 
and makes it comprehensible and intelligible?", the conclusion he came to was that the true cause and 
reason behind existence, the purpose or ultimate principles upon which existence itself rested, was in fact in 
the end the Forms and Ideas which existed behind and above the material physical world so to speak, and 
ultimately was the source of meaning and comprehension in any form to anything that we experience and 
anything that we would call "real", or having existence in any way, shape or form.  In this sense Socrates, as 
Plato portrays him, is an idealist in the purest sense of the term, and represents the very same conclusion 
that Descartes comes to some two thousand years later as expressed in his famous dictum, "cogito ergo 
sum". 
To Plato then, and in all likelihood this doctrine is Plato's rather than Socrates's, it is in the intelligible realm 
of ideas where truth and meaning and the ultimate cause and purpose of universal existence, can ultimately 
be found.  As he expresses it, the only way anything comes into being is by "participating in its own proper 
essence", Ideas and Forms define "being" in and of itself as it were.  To come to this conclusion, he must 
reject physical and material causation as the defining principles of reality and instead rests his metaphysics 
upon the reality of forms, as expressed in the Timaeus as intellectual constructs which ultimately originate 
from the Good or the Best which he views as the pinnacle of all universal intelligible principles upon which all 
forms and ideas rest, and which represents the governing principle behind existence itself, its ultimate cause 
as it were.  In the Phaedo, part of his argument for reaching this somewhat daring conclusion, the essence of 
his idealism, by likening the Soul to the realm of forms and the Good - like can only recognize and know like.  
Toward the end of Phaedo, as his conclusions and arguments for the immortality of the Soul are challenged 
by the other interlocutors in the dialogue, Socrates argues that things that are of one principle or Form, one 
primal characteristic, cannot in fact at the same time consist of in any way its opposite principle or 
characteristic.  As cold can never be hot, as good can never be bad, life can never be death, appealing to the 
reasoning of a doctrine of opposing principles again but this time not principles of mutually interdependent 
and opposing processes, but the mutually exclusive nature of fundamental opposite "characteristics", i.e. 
properties of a "thing", "object" or "concept" in and of itself. 

"Well, then, if one is added to one [101c] or if one is divided, you would avoid saying that the addition or the 
division is the cause of two?  You would exclaim loudly that you know no other way by which anything can 
come into existence than by participating in the proper essence of each thing in which it participates, and 
therefore you accept no other cause of the existence of two than participation in duality, and things which are 
to be two must participate in duality, and whatever is to be one must participate in unity, and you would pay no 
attention to the divisions and additions and other such subtleties, leaving those for wiser men to explain. 

In this way, something that is even can never be odd and something that is cold can never be hot, and 
therefore something that is alive - as the Soul is equated with, i.e. life itself - can never be dead.  So he uses 
reason and dialectic here again to argue his case for the immortality of the Soul, that it is life itself and 
therefore cannot be or akin to in any way, shape or form death and therefore can never in fact die.  That is to 
say that Soul is associated with and conceptually equivalent to life, and that it therefore cannot be associated 
with or have the property of its opposite characteristic, i.e. death, and therefore the Soul must be, by 
definition, eternally existence and forever "living" as it were. 
Whether or not one agrees with the arguments and analogies that Plato uses to establish the reality of forms 
and the Immortality of the Soul in the Phaedo and the Republic, the method he uses to build his case as it 
were, his use of dialectic - discussion and dialogue rooted in reason and argument - to make his case, is 
innovative in and of itself and comes to represent in many respects the hallmark of the Hellenic philosophical 
tradition.  Furthermore, the idealism inherent in his theory of forms establishes the primary beachhead in the 
Western philosophical tradition upon which really all subsequent philosophical, and theological, intellectual 
development takes place.  

Perhaps Plato's greatest contribution to Western philosophy is the idealism embedded in his theory of forms, 
which in essence breaks down existence itself as not only a physical world of inanimate and animate objects, 
but a theory of knowledge and understanding which is based upon the notion that a) the understanding of a 
thing is predicated upon the existence of a true form, or idea of a thing without which the understanding, or 
even the thing itself, could not truly "exist:, and b) that such forms or ideas existed eternally as intellectual 
constructs upon which our understanding of the world around us was based.  It is from this premise and 
starting point that we must begin to try and grasp Plato's perspective on not just reality and knowledge, but 
also ultimately his views on universal creation as well as his conception of the human Soul, all of which 
underpin not just his ethical philosophy but also his socio-political philosophy as reflected in the Republic and 
Laws most notably.
One of the primary themes that underlies all of Plato's works, and can be especially seen in the Timaeus and 
Phaedo among other of his prominent works, is that the principles of reality or the known universe, and the 
very meaning of life and the pursuit of wisdom and understanding are not just worth exploring, but represent 
the very highest goal of life - the end of the philosopher.  His means of exploration, and perhaps the most 
defining characteristic of the Hellenic philosophical tradition which he so greatly influenced, is the role of 
reason and argument in the form of dialogue, logos and dialectic respectively, in ascertaining these universal 
truths, even if absolute truth or certainty is not completely possible given the limits of human understanding.  
Whether or not he believed that absolute knowledge (sophia) was altogether possible or not is debatable and 
this is perhaps one of the great mysteries of Platonic philosophy as we try to understand it through the 
metaphors, analogies and arguments he presents and explores throughout his dialogues, the method and 
means of communication of these ideas and principles in fact lending itself to skepticism which was a 
hallmark of many of the philosophers which succeeded him at the Academy.  
With respect to the nature of what can truly be known, from which any definition of reality can be drawn, 
Plato's teachings as we understand them through his dialogues establish the first and foremost tradition of 
skepticism in Western - Indo-European really - thought.  This tradition, which starts with Socrates and clearly 
influenced Plato significantly, establishes the grounds of epistemology - the study of knowledge (epistêmê)- 
which is reflected in the philosophical tradition which Plato leaves behind at the Academy which he founded 
in Athens circa 387 BCE.  This tradition of skepticism" represented the core intellectual stream of thought 
emanating from the Academy subsequent to Plato which provided the basis for other currents of more 
materialistic and empiricist philosophical schools such as Stoicism and Epicureanism which has a much more 
broad definition of knowledge, each playing a strong role in the development of Hellenic philosophy in the 
classical Greco-Roman period.
Plato's teachings were founded upon the principle, again believed to have been a legacy of Socrates himself, 
that there were significant intellectual limits upon that which could be truly known given that knowledge 
itself was predicated on the a priori existence of Forms or Ideas without which any understanding or 
comprehension of the physical world of matter comprehended by the senses is possible.  For Plato 
considered knowledge itself to be a type of "recollection", which was part of his argument for the 
immortality of the Soul, which was the "form" of the body, one of the primary themes of the Phaedo, a 
dialogue which circulated in antiquity under the title of On the Soul.  
Probably the most comprehensive literary expression of Plato's notion of knowledge, the distinction he draws 
between the intelligible world (higher form of knowledge) and the visible world (lower form) comes from the 
Republic, expressed in what has come to be known as the analogy of the divided line. 

"Conceive then," said I, "as we were saying, that there are these two entities, and that one of them is sovereign 
over the intelligible order and region and the other over the world of the eye-ball, not to say the sky-ball, but let 
that pass.  You surely apprehend the two types, the visible and the intelligible."  "I do."  

"Represent them then, as it were, by a line divided into two unequal sections and cut each section again in the 
same ratio (the section, that is, of the visible and that of the intelligible order), and then as an expression of the 
ratio of their comparative clearness and obscurity you will have, as one of the sections of the visible world, 
images.  By images I mean, first, shadows, and then reflections in water and on surfaces of dense, smooth and 
bright texture, and everything of that kind, if you apprehend."  "I do."  "As the second section assume that of 
which this is a likeness or an image, that is, the animals about us and all plants and the whole class of objects 
made by man."  "I so assume it," he said.  "Would you be willing to say," said I, "that the division in respect of 
reality and truth or the opposite is expressed by the proportion: as is the opiniable to the knowable so is the 
likeness to that of which it is a likeness?"  "I certainly would." 

"Consider then again the way in which we are to make the division of the intelligible section."  "In what way?"  
"By the distinction that there is one section of it which the soul is compelled to investigate by treating as images 
the things imitated in the former division, and by means of assumptions from which it proceeds not up to a first 
principle but down to a conclusion, while there is another section in which it advances from its assumption to a 
beginning or principle that transcends assumption, and in which it makes no use of the images employed by the 
other section, relying on ideas only and progressing systematically through ideas."  

Here we have Plato's fundamental distinction drawn, in the analogy of a "divided line", the world of the 
visible, that which can be perceived by the senses, and the world of intelligibles, i.e. thoughts and ideas 
divided into two unequal portions of a line, the intelligible portion being given greater emphasis and 
therefore greater (relative) size than its counterpart that represents the visible world.  Then each of these 
sections is divided again into two unequal portions of the same ration relative to each other, with the larger 
proportion of each subsection is sized based upon its relative clarity from an intellectual standpoint.
The smaller of the two segments of the visible portion of the line, i.e. the visible world, is made up of first 
images - shadows, reflections and the like - which are less "real", more "obscure", than the "things" which 
they represent in and of themselves, i.e. that which makes up the larger portion of the visible world part of 
the line because the "things" themselves are have more intellectual clarity or definition that the "images" or 
"shadows" of things.
Likewise, and analogously, the intelligible world is also divided into two unequal sections - of the same 
proportion.  The first of which, the smaller subsection, consists of the treatment of the images of things, and 
via various assumptions and conclusions various ideas or "theories", abstract conclusions are drawn, i.e. 
"bottom up" or "deductive" reasoning of sorts.  The second section, the larger subsection of the intelligible 
world does not deal with things themselves, or even their images or representations but only deals with ideas 
in and of themselves and based upon pure intellectual reasoning - dialectic or logos - progresses from 
various assumptions or theses up to an ontological first principle or set of principles, i.e. bottom up logic or 
"inductive reasoning" of sorts.

 
Figure 23: Plato's Epistemological worldview, i.e. the Analogy Divided Line 

Plato then goes on to use this analogy of the divided line as a representation, and relative worth or value, of 
four different types of knowledge, essentially using the divided line to describe his epistemological 
worldview.  Each section he describes as "affections of the Soul", our perhaps better put, "capabilities" or 
"faculties" of the human mind.  The largest section of the line represents the clearest, the least obscure, and 
the closest depiction of Truth or Reality and is representative of conclusions drawn by use of pure reason 
(logos), the faculty of the mind which deals only with ideas in and of themselves and reaches conclusions 
from principles up to the greatest and highest principle, i.e. the Good (segment DE).  
This type of knowledge is followed then by lesser knowledge which is arrived at by the faculty of 
understanding, which draws various conclusions based upon "thinking" about not just abstract ideas in and of 
themselves but also about things and images as well (segment CD).  So although this type of thinking, like 
geometry for example, still deals with the intelligible world and therefore is of higher value than the "visible" 
realm of perception, is nonetheless of lesser value than conclusions drawn via pure reason and using pure 
ideas because this type of knowledge does deal with objects, even if they are simply images or 
representations of physical objects or things.
These two types of thinking that are categorized in the world of intelligibles are then followed by lower forms 
of knowledge which deal directly with objects of the visible world, the higher of which Plato refers to as 
"belief", or "opinion" which deals with objects of the senses that exist within the world of visible world itself, 
what one might call the material world or the domain of  physics (segment BC), and then the lowest form of 
knowledge which he describes as "conjecture" or "imagination" (segment AB) which deals with not things in 
and of themselves but their shapes or images and deals with the likeness of visible things. 
In this section of the Republic, which precedes his more graphic metaphor of his theory of forms as told in his 
Allegory of the Cave, albeit wrapped up in the middle of a socio-political work, does represent from a 
Western standpoint the one of the first prolific and well-articulated forays into the world of metaphysics, i.e. 
the exploration of the true nature of reality that underlies the world of the senses, and attempts to explain 
our place in this world and the illusory and shadowy nature of the objects of our perception independent of 
any religious or theological dogma.  It also illustrates the prevalence of geometry and mathematics as a one 
of the primary means to which this reality can be understood, a marked characteristic of not just the Platonic 
philosophical tradition, but the Western philosophical tradition as a whole. 

It is in the Timaeus however, one of the later and more mature works of Plato where he expounds upon his 
view on the nature of the divine, the source of the known universe (cosmological view), as well as the role of 
the Soul in nature.  And although Plato, and Socrates as represented by Plato's earlier works, rejected the 
mythological and anthropomorphic theology that was prevalent in ancient Greece, Plato does not completely 
depart from the concept of a theological and divine or supra-natural creator of the known universe, at least 
as reflected in the words of Timaeus in the dialogue that bears his name.  
In the Timaeus, Plato describes a "likely story" as to how the world was created, leveraging again reason 
(logos) and dialectic, and heavy use of analogy and metaphor, to describe the creation of the universe as a 
product of the intelligent design of a creator, his Demiurge.   In many respects, the ideas and postulates of 
the Timaeus represent an expansion on Plato's theory of forms which he introduces in Phaedo and the 
Republic but follows its intellectual development into the idea of the Good, and its role in the creation of the 
cosmos (kosmos), the material universe within which we live.  He starts again by drawing the distinction 
between the intelligible and sensible worlds, that which he calls Being and Becoming, two terms that have 
come to define Plato's epistemology as well as his cosmogony.

Now first of all we must, in my judgment, make the following distinction.  What is that which is Existent always 
[28a] and has no Becoming?  And what is that which is Becoming always and never is Existent?  Now the one of 
these is apprehensible by thought with the aid of reasoning, since it is ever uniformly existent; whereas the 
other is an object of opinion with the aid of unreasoning sensation, since it becomes and perishes and is never 
really existent. 

Here again Plato makes a distinction between the physical, or visible, world which is subject to change, and 
the eternal and changeless world of intelligibles, the Intellect (Nous) which can only be apprehended by use 
of the mind and reason, i.e. is not perceivable by the senses directly and can be discerned in the realm of the 
mind or thought.  He draws the basic distinction between that which is subject to change, the "visible" or 
"material" world (Becoming), and that which is eternal and changeless (Being).  Knowledge of the former, 
which falls under the category of the natural sciences which is the main thrust and emphasis of Aristotle's 
reality, or sphere of knowledge, is not rejected outright by Plato but is held subservient - due to its constant 
fluctuating and changing state - to the world of ideas and thought which is apprehended by intelligence 
(Nous) and reason (Logos) and which is changeless and eternal.  
The realm of Becoming is always subjected to perishing at some level and therefore never truly "is", or can be 
said to "exist" within the context of Plato's epistemological and ontological framework.  It is conceived of by 
what he deems "opinion", alluding to the fact that perception is subjective in nature and what one perceives 
or experiences is not necessarily the same experience or perception of someone else, or some other being 
for that matter.  It is perceived via the senses, i.e. not by reason.  Whereas the latter realm always "is", Being, 
is changeless and eternal, and is conceived of, apprehended as it were, by reason, mind and intelligence 
alone.  It is not subject to change and therefore according to Plato it truly can be said to actually "be", or can 
be said to "exist" within Plato's epistemological framework, hence the term Being that he allots to it.
It is within this context of Plato's distinction between the world of Being and Becoming, as he describes it in 
the Timaeus here, that the connection between Plato and Parmenides is drawn.  In many ancient 
philosophical circles, Heraclitus is said to be the mother of Plato's teachings where Parmenides is said to be 
his father and it is his later works, and again specifically in the Timaeus, that we see this distinction along the 
lines of Being and Becoming clearly drawn, representing the most mature form of Plato's' intellectual 
conception of knowledge, i.e. what can be known, what philosophers call epistemology.
Parmenides (late 6th early 5th century BCE) is known for his one work, known by the title On Nature, written in 
hexameter verse which although does not survive in full, is believed to survive mostly in tact through 
quotations and excerpts of later philosophers and commentators, reflecting its significant influence on early 
Hellenic philosophical development.  Most certainly Parmenides is one of the most influential of the "Pre-
Socratics", and it is through the interpretation of his philosophy through Plato really, that this determination 
is made.  He is believed to have been born in Elea in Southern Italy and therefore is historically categorized as 
part of the "Italian" branch of early Hellenic philosophy - as per Diogenes Laertius, the same branch as 
Pythagoras who represents the first and earliest of this tradition and as distinguished from the Ionian branch 
within which Socrates, Plato and Aristotle, as well as the Cynics and Stoics, belong to.  
In Parmenides's poem, he describes a pseudo allegorical journey up into the gates of Heaven driven by a 
golden chariot where he is initiated into eternal wisdom, i.e. the mysteries as it were, by the goddess of 
wisdom herself represented by the goddess Night, the very same goddess who plays a critical role in the 
unfolding of the universe in the in the Orphic mythological tradition.  [In later classical Greek mythology, she 
is personified as Athena, the goddess of wisdom and the daughter of Zeus, and it is no doubt she who most 
represents the notion of wisdom (i.e. sophia) as Plato perceives and describes it, in particular its illuminary 
nature from an intellectual perspective.]  
In the excerpts that are extant from his poem On Nature, Parmenides distinguishes in very esoteric and 
almost mystical - and certainly cryptic - language that which is said to "be" or exist (to eon), or "true reality" 
(alêtheia), which he associates with thought and language and is wholly distinguishable from that which 
cannot in fact be said to exist in the same way, i.e. that which is not "real" and is wholly distinct from true 
reality (again alêtheia), due to its fluctuating and ever changing nature.  

The thing that can be thought and that for the sake of which the thought exists is the same; for you cannot find 
thought without something that is, as to which it is uttered.  And there is not, and never shall be, anything 
besides what is, since fate has chained it so as to be whole and immovable.  Wherefore all these things are but 
names which mortals have given, believing them to be true-coming into being and passing away, being and 
not being, change of place and alteration of bright color.  [R. P. 119]. 

With Parmenides, as we know him again through the quotations and comments of philosophers from the 
classical Hellenic period and later, we find what is believed to be the source of Plato's epistemology where, in 
Vedic terms, the world of "name and form" which is in a constant state of change and flux, which falls in the 
domain of what Plato terms "opinion", is held to be an inferior form of knowledge than the realm of the 
changeless and eternally existent world of ideas thought, as discerned by pure reason (logos), i.e. "true 
reality" which Parmenides calls alêtheia  and which Plato refers to as Being, again distinguished from that 
which is Becoming.  This bifurcation and sublimation of the material world for the ethereal or rational world 
ultimately provides the basis for Plato's theory of forms and is the basis upon which he builds not only his 
theory of knowledge but also his cosmogony as outlined in the Timaeus.  
Furthermore, while Parmenides writes in hexameter verse, there is clearly a logical cohesion to his work, an 
argument or a case he is trying to make, to establish the grounds of being, in a classical philosophical sense, 
where he is attempting to justify and rationalize, and in turn provide the logical foundation for, his position of 
establishing that which "is" (to eon), or can be said to exist due to its eternal and unchanging nature which in 
turn again is distinguished from, and held to be of higher intellectual and philosophical value than, that which 
is subject to change and ultimate dissolution, i.e. the objective and material world.   
In this sense Parmenides work and philosophy that is represented therein is not only the forefather of Plato's 
Being and Becoming as laid out in the Timaeus, but also the forefather of the means by which this distinction 
is established, i.e. by reason and argument which Plato presents in dialogue form using logic, or dialectic, 
which can be viewed as a more mature and evolved form of (written) communication of ideas and 
metaphysics than that which is used by Parmenides who follows in the footsteps of the earlier mythic poets 
Homer and Hesiod.

Transitioning back to Plato's cosmogony and its relationship to the worlds of Being and Becoming 
respectively in the Timaeus, we find a description which is markedly anthropomorphic in conception and yet 
at the same time rests upon his basic metaphysical delineation of reality between Being and Becoming - i.e. 
that which is permanent, eternal and unchanging and comprehended by reason (logos) and thought or ideas 
(eidôs), versus the sensible realm which is subject to change and "opinion" and therefore is characterized by 
an implicit creative and destructive process.

Again, everything which becomes must of necessity become owing to some Cause; for without a cause it is 
impossible for anything to attain becoming.  But when the artificer of any object, in forming its shape and 
quality, keeps his gaze fixed on that which is uniform, using a model of this kind, that object, executed in this 
way, must of necessity [28b] be beautiful; but whenever he gazes at that which has come into existence and 
uses a created model, the object thus executed is not beautiful.  

Now the whole Heaven, or Cosmos, or if there is any other name which it specially prefers, by that let us call it, 
-so, be its name what it may, we must first investigate concerning it that primary question which has to be 
investigated at the outset in every case, -namely, whether it has existed always, having no beginning of 
generation, or whether it has come into existence, having begun from some beginning. It has come into 
existence; for it is visible and tangible and possessed of a body; and all such things are sensible, [28c] and things 
sensible, being apprehensible by opinion with the aid of sensation, come into existence, as we saw, and are 
generated.  

And that which has come into existence must necessarily, as we say, have come into existence by reason of 
some Cause.  Now to discover the Maker and Father of this Universe were a task indeed; and having discovered 
Him, to declare Him unto all men were a thing impossible.  However, let us return and inquire further 
concerning the Cosmos, -after which of the Models did its Architect construct it? 


Here we see not only the implicit anthropomorphic, or perhaps better put anthrocentric, view of universal 
creation, but also the fundamental assumption of causality which rests at the heart of what is perhaps best 
terms his "theological" cosmological conception.  In other words, implicit in the existence of the universe as 
we know and perceive it, in fact implicit in the existence in anything, is some element of causality even if in 
this context he intends to mean "purpose" or "reason", rather than a physical chain of causality which is how 
we have come to identify the meaning in the modern era of empirical science. 
Furthermore, he argues that the universe must have been "created" - i.e. has some sort of beginning in time 
and space as it were - because it exists within the sensible realm, the realm that is in and of itself defined by 
change, is apprehended by "opinion", is subjectively perceived and is therefore - again by definition - in a 
constant state of flux which is bound by an implicit and eternally present creative and destructive process of 
Becoming.  

[29a] Was it after that which is self-identical and uniform, or after that which has come into existence; Now if 
so be that this Cosmos is beautiful and its Constructor good, it is plain that he fixed his gaze on the Eternal; but 
if otherwise (which is an impious supposition), his gaze was on that which has come into existence.  But it is 
clear to everyone that his gaze was on the Eternal; for the Cosmos is the fairest of all that has come into 
existence, and He the best of all the Causes.  So having in this wise come into existence, it has been constructed 
after the pattern of that which is apprehensible by reason and thought and is self-identical. [29b]

Again, if these premises be granted, it is wholly necessary that this Cosmos should be a Copy of something.  
Now in regard to every matter it is most important to begin at the natural beginning.  Accordingly, in dealing 
with a copy and its model, we must affirm that the accounts given will themselves be akin to the diverse objects 
which they serve to explain; those which deal with what is abiding and firm and discernible by the aid of 
thought will be abiding and unshakable; and in so far as it is possible and fitting for statements to be irrefutable 
and invincible, [29c] they must in no wise fall short thereof; whereas the accounts of that which is copied after 
the likeness of that Model, and is itself a likeness, will be analogous thereto and possess likelihood; for I as 
Being is to Becoming, so is Truth to Belief.  

Wherefore, Socrates, if in our treatment of a great host of matters regarding the Gods and the generation of 
the Universe we prove unable to give accounts that are always in all respects self-consistent and perfectly 
exact, be not thou surprised; rather we should be content if we can furnish accounts that are inferior to none in 
likelihood, remembering that both I who speak [29d] and you who judge are but human creatures, so that it 
becomes us to accept the likely account of these matters and forbear to search beyond it.  


In this passage, we find Plato, in the words of Timaeus in the dialogue, arguing that there must in fact exist a 
model upon which the cosmos (kosmos) is fashioned and that this model must be the "best" model, i.e. that 
which is eternal and changeless which he implies is the source of all things, i.e. the world of Becoming.  This 
model is based upon the Good, the form of forms, an eternal and changeless idea which can only be 
apprehended - if it can be apprehended at all - by reason and thought and from which the world of 
Becoming is generated, or brought about from.  
He equates the world of Being here to "true reality", what he refers to as "Truth", and the world of Becoming 
to the domain of "opinion" or "subjective belief", lining up these two metaphysical principles which 
presumably derive from Parmenides squarely with his theory of knowledge.  The former, the realm Being 
which is characterized by reason, thought and ideas, he considers to be the higher form of knowledge upon 
which the latter, the realm of Becoming which is forever changing and in a state of flux and is characterized 
by opinion and subjective belief, is molded from or shaped out of.  
Plato then goes on, through the narrative of Timaeus in the dialogue, to describe in detail just how the divine 
craftsman, the Demiurge, establishes universal creation, what has come to be known as the "Cosmic Soul", 
applying various rational, proportional, mathematical and geometrical (presumably of Pythagorean influence) 
constructs onto the primordial chaos out of which the four basic elements - earth, air, water and fire - as 
well as the heavens and earth and all living creatures therein came into existence.  But this world of 
Becoming, and the creative process which he outlines therein, attempting as best he can to provide a logical 
and rational account of creation in again what he refers to as a "likely" account, resting on and alluding to the 
limits of human knowledge in and of itself in understanding the reason and ultimate cause and process by 
which the universe comes into being, nonetheless presumes the universe to be crafted upon the model of 
the Good, a benign creator as it were that provides the foundation for the Judeo-Christian worldview.

[30a] For God desired that, so far as possible, all things should be good and nothing evil; wherefore, when He 
took over all that was visible, seeing that it was not in a state of rest but in a state of discordant and disorderly 
motion, He brought it into order out of disorder, deeming that the former state is in all ways better than the 
latter.  For Him who is most good it neither was nor is permissible to perform any action save what is most fair.  
As He reflected, therefore, He perceived that of such creatures as are by nature visible, [30b] none that is 
irrational will be fairer, comparing wholes with wholes, than the rational; and further, that reason cannot 
possibly belong to any apart from Soul.  So because of this reflection He constructed reason within soul and soul 
within body as He fashioned the All, that so the work He was executing might be of its nature most fair and 
most good.  

Thus, then, in accordance with the likely account, we must declare that this Cosmos has verily come into 
existence as a Living Creature endowed with soul and reason owing to the providence of God.   [30c] This being 
established, we must declare that which comes next in order.  In the semblance of which of the living Creatures 
did the Constructor of the cosmos construct it?  We shall not deign to accept any of those which belong by 
nature to the category of "parts"; for nothing that resembles the imperfect would ever become fair.  But we 
shall affirm that the Cosmos, more than aught else, resembles most closely that Living Creature of which all 
other living creatures, severally and generically, are portions.  For that Living Creature embraces and contains 
within itself all the intelligible Living Creatures, just as this Universe contains us and all the other visible living 
creatures [30d] that have been fashioned.  For since God desired to make it resemble most closely that 
intelligible Creature which is fairest of all and in all ways most perfect, He constructed it as a Living Creature, 
one and visible, containing within itself all the living creatures which are by nature akin to itself. 

We can see here that Plato sees the rational and ordered as of higher value than the chaotic and disordered, 
and he assigns the highest value to reason itself (again logos) which is attributed and ultimately equated with 
the divine or Cosmic Soul.  Furthermore, Plato perceives the universe, in very much the same vein as the 
Stoic tradition which was very influential in the Greco-Roman period and influenced early Christian theology 
(pneuma, the divine spirit), as a living, breathing entity which not only embodies, encapsulates as it were, all 
of the kosmos within it, but also is endowed with "Soul" and "reason", just as the individual is at some extent.  
God here, the Cosmic Soul, is fashioned in the image of man as it were as opposed to the other way around 
as it is presented in the Judeo-Christian account of creation.

At the heart of Plato's philosophy was the belief in the ontological primacy of the rational faculty of man, 
reason, along with the tools of the trade which reflected and were to be leveraged by this faculty - namely 
reason (logos), dialectic, logic and mathematics - as the means by which the fundamental truths of these 
ancient mystic traditions could be known or brought to light.  He was the first to establish the connection 
between cosmogony, physics and ethics to a degree that had not be done before, a characteristic that 
became one of the primary characteristics of Hellenic and Roman philosophy and was even followed in the 
Scholastic tradition up until the end of the Middle Ages.  
Plato also established a good deal of the semantic framework, in Greek, through which these esoteric, 
complex and interrelated topics could be discussed and explored, a development whose importance cannot 
be overstated.  For before Plato, the language of philosophy was shrouded in myth, analogy, and metaphor, 
and after Plato all of the Greek philosophic schools and practitioners now at east had a working vocabulary 
through which philosophic ideas and concepts could be further explored and elucidated upon, even if the 
various schools disagreed with each other on a variety of issues.
Plato's unique contribution to theological development in antiquity then can be viewed as placing the 
rational faculty of man as the primarily tool through which any knowledge of the gods, or reality itself even, 
should be drawn.  His reach extended well beyond the theological domain however, extending into areas that 
are known today as Psychology, Ethics, Political Philosophy, and most importantly perhaps the goal of life 
itself.  Many of his lasting contributions to the philosophic, and later scientific, development in the West are 
not necessarily the conclusions that he drew or solutions he put forth, but the tools and institutions which he 
established for their pursuit.  
It can be said definitively however that with Plato the supremacy of reason and rationality in the search for 
truth and meaning in life as well as the nature and origins of the universe is firmly established.  To Plato the 
epistemological supremacy of the intelligible realm, the world of Being, over the sensible realm, or the world 
of Becoming, is the predominant characteristic of his metaphysics.  The former of which is characterized by 
forms and ideas from which the material universe as we know it, and all living souls as well, are ultimately 
"fashioned" from, all modeled and stemming from the belief that the Creator, if indeed he can be said to 
exist, must have fashioned things according to what is most fair and most just, i.e. the Good or Best.