
There are many parallels that can be drawn between early Hellenic and Upanishadic philosophy.  In 
particular, we find many similarities between the philosophy presented by Plato in his Middle Period as he 
developed and fine-tuned his theory of forms - in particular as presented in the Phaedo - and much of what 
we find in the Upanishads.  In fact this is the impetus of the seminal works of M. L. West (Early Greek 
Philosophy and the Orient, Oxford University Press 1971) and Thomas McEvilley (The Shape of Ancient 
Thought, Allworth Press, 2002), two of the most comprehensive works that outline not just the similarities of 
the two respective philosophical traditions, but attempt to establish direct links between the traditions 
themselves via some form of cultural and intellectual diffusion, both in the early period as the respective 
philosophic traditions evolve into their initial form in the first half of the first millennium BCE, and also as 
they evolve into more mature forms in the second half of the first millennium BCE and into the first 
millennium CE. 
What both of these works allude to however, even though this hypothesis is for the most part rejected by 
both authors, is that these parallels and similarities could be the result of not simply intellectual borrowing 
and direct contact between the founders and initial shapers of the respective traditions, but ultimately could 
be that the two traditions emanate and originate from a common source.  This hypothesis not only would 
explain the glaring similarities of the two systems of thought (if we can categorize them into such neat little 
boxes), but also would not require that direct contact between the two cultures and intellectual traditions 
existed, a fact which although each of the two authors make a valiant attempt to establish but nonetheless 
we have virtually no direct evidence of.  
All of the evidence presented by the two authors and scholars in fact is circumstantial.  In other words, their 
theory of direct contact of the Pre-Socratics and the Upanishadic philosophical tradition is based upon the 
similarities and parallels of the traditions, not based upon evidence of direct contact itself - from either the 
archeological, linguistic or historical evidence that is extent.  And while certainly the absence of evidence is 
not necessarily evidence of absence, the best theory of how these similarities came to be would seem to be 
that they share a common origin rather than the two systems of thought developed in parallel to each other 
with some sort of direct contact through the Sumer-Babylonian, Assyrian and then Persian Empires which did 
at least geographically speaking touch the outskirts of Ionia to the West and the Indian subcontinent to the 
East.
A theory of common origins is aligned with the linguistic evidence in fact , but this theory requires an 
adjustment and recalibration of the mind of ancient man in the first millennium BCE.  In other words, the 
direct contact and cultural diffusion hypothesis is convenient because it assumes that the underlying content 
of these philosophical systems is actually invented, i.e. does not exist prior to, the first half of the first 
millennium BCE as the various works that represent what we have come to understand as early Greek and 
Upanishadic philosophy were crafted and written down.  
But a more reasonable hypothesis, and again one that is better aligned with the evidence and what we know 
about how "philosophy" - the ancients understanding of reality from a metaphysical perspective - was 
handed down was that in fact these ideas that we find in the Upanishads and the early Greek philosophic 
works had existed for centuries, and were passed down orally through various teacher and student settings 
as we know was common throughout antiquity, prior to them being written down and captures in the various 
treatises that have come to represent these respective traditions.  
For it is well established that the seeds of many of the ideas present in the Upanishads can also be found in 
Vedas, works which although have a different emphasis that the Upanishads, nonetheless reflect the 
intellectual and theological (we hesitate to use the term religious) tradition of the so-called Indo-Aryans from 
at least the second millennium BCE.  So the idea that the philosophy as presented and compiled in the 
Upanishads in the first half of the first millennium BCE did not exist until these works were actually compiled 
(based upon the linguistic evidence as they were probably not written down until the second half of the first 
millennium BCE at the earliest) presumes that the authors of the Upanishads were "inventors" of a new 
mode of thinking.  But the works themselves say no such thing.  The Upanishads speak to a perennial 
philosophy that was identified and "discovered', i.e. "revealed" by the great rishis, sages or seers, who 
established the Indo-Aryan civilization as it is reflected by the Vedas, which they are simply recording and 
conveying in a different form as it were.  In other words, there is nothing to say - and in fact the tradition 
itself speaks to this very point - that the philosophy of the Upanishads was not "existent" and "taught", and 
ultimately originated from intellectual developments that were in fact much earlier than when these 
treatises were actually compiled.  
While this idea, this notion that Upanishadic philosophy is a 2nd millennium BCE, or even 3rd millennium BCE 
construct, one that is co-existent with the Indo-Aryan peoples and culture and one that is not just seeded by 
the Vedas but in fact existed and was taught by the sages and seers of the early Indo-Aryans as the 
Upanishads attest to, implies that the similarities between the early Hellenic philosophical tradition and 
Upanishadic philosophy must be due to common origins, effectively ruling out the possibility of the 
similarities being due to direct cultural or intellectual contact.
This common origins hypothesis, if true (and again it is the theory which most closely aligns with the evidence 
at present) which is what the author is proposing here does two things - 1) it rules out the theory of direct 
contact between the Pre-Socratics and the Indo-Aryans which again is consistent with the evidence which is 
altogether lacking in this regard (again similarities between the two traditions are just as easily, and arguably 
more coherently, explained by a common origin hypothesis), and 2) it implies that these intellectual 
traditions, these theo-philosophical systems of thought, which we find present in the early thinkers and 
writers in the Mediterranean and the Indian subcontinent in the first millennium BCE, must have been 
around, existent in some form or another, much earlier than is typically thought.  So common origins 
presupposes, in fact depends upon categorically, the existence of these belief systems - at least the ones that 
we find present in both traditions - at a much earlier time frame in the history of man than is typically 
supposed by modern scholars.
This a very important and arguably revolutionary notion regarding ancient man that follows from this 
common origin hypothesis, i.e. our Laurasian hypothesis, is that these ancient peoples were in fact much 
more intelligent than we give them credit for being.  That the ideas that they present in the respective 
traditions as writing is invented in the first millennium BCE actually reflect a tradition, a belief system, that 
does not just pre-date the compilation of the various texts - that Plato in fact conceptually "borrowed" from 
Heraclitus, Pythagoras and Parmenides for example which is basically considered to be a fact at this point - 
but that these Pre-Socratics which influenced Plato in fact drew from a much earlier theo-philosophical 
tradition which did not just "borrow" or was somewhat influenced from "Oriental" theo-philosophical 
traditions (which also is considered to be a fact at this point and again is the primary thrust of the works of 
McEvilley and West), but that in fact they were drawing from a much earlier tradition that was present in the 
Mediterranean and Near East in the first half of the first millennium BCE which was "Indo-European".  We call 
this belief system "Indo-European" in the sense that it was co-existent with the linguistic influence of the 
Indo-European language which we know, from the linguistic evidence, represents the parent linguistic 
systems of both the Indo-Aryan people as well as the Greeks, as well as the Indo-Iranians (i.e. the Persians).

Starting with this premise then, let's look again at the similarities between the early Hellenic philosophical 
tradition and Upanishadic philosophy, but instead of trying to establish direct connections and parallels to 
the "founders" or "inventors" of the respective traditions as McEvilley and West do , we consider that Plato 
"expresses" and articulates this distinctive Indo-European philosophy in his works in Greek in the late 5th and 
early 4th century BCE just as the authors of the Upanishads "express" this Indo-European philosophy in 
Sanskrit, each using different words and symbols from their respective linguistic traditions (speaking and 
writing systems) but each expressing the same theo-philosophical principles more or less.  
In other words, inverting the logic so to speak, if one starts with the assumption that there did indeed exist 
some form of Indo-European philosophy which was co-existent with the Indo-European people and language 
from which the Greeks and Indo-Aryans (and Indo-Iranians) descend - which again is the theory which aligns 
best with the evidence and best explains the similarities between the early Greek philosophical tradition and 
the theo-philosophical tradition present in the Upanishads - then we can ascertain the characteristics of this 
belief system, one which we can roughly date along with the parent of the Indo-European language family 
itself (i.e. roughly end of 4th to middle 3rd millennium BCE or so), by comparing and contrasting the two belief 
systems in their "mature" form.  Characteristics that they share can be said to be in all likelihood of common 
origin and characteristics which are distinct can be said to be local variants, just as the linguistic theory holds.  
To accomplish this, instead of taking broad strokes across the entire Pre-Socratic and Platonic intellectual 
landscape and comparing the various belief systems with counterparts from the "Orient" (which is code for 
the geographic regions to the East of Ionia, which is where many of the Pre-Socratics heralded from, i.e. what 
is referred to as the "Near East" which effectively describes areas of Sumer-Babylonian, Assyrian and Persian 
influence) which is the approach that McEvilley, West and Burkert take effectively, what we will do is look at 
two specific works that essentially reflect the core theo-philosophical traditions of the Platonic and 
Upanishadic traditions respectively in their most "mature" form in the middle of the first millennium BCE and 
deconstruct them so to speak to look at just how similar the doctrines are.  We perform this analysis keeping 
in mind that while the treatises were written in geographical regions for which there is no evidence of 
intellectual contact (despite the Sumer-Babylonian and Persian theory of contact put forward by West and 
McEvilley which we reject for the more reasonable hypothesis that the similarities are due to common 
origins) and which were compiled in different languages and herald from different but ultimately related 
mythical and theological traditions.
The two works we will look at have a very similar narrative and a very similar context and topic/theme and 
therefore provide a sound basis for comparison and general summation of the metaphysics and philosophy 
of the respective traditions as a whole.  They are the Katha Upanishad and the Phaedo, each which deals very 
directly and specifically with the notion of death and the question of what if anything that persists after it, i.e. 
the immortality of the soul, as well as the nature of reality and the means by which such knowledge can be 
revealed.  The similarities between the two narratives, as well as of course the content which will be explored 
in depth below, speaks to and in and of itself a core piece of evidence for the common origins of the theo-
philosophical doctrines presented therein.
The Katha Upanishad is one of the primary (Mukhya) Upanishads embedded in the last part of the Yajurveda 
and consists of two chapters (Adhyāyas), each divided into three sections or Vallis. The narrative starts with 
the story of a boy Nachiketa, who asks his father to whom he shall be given to knowing that his father, as a 
sage, is to give up all his worldly possessions.  After asking his father, the sage Vajasravasa, three times to 
whom he shall be given to, his father states emphatically (no doubt with some level of annoyance at his son 
as any father can relate to), "to Death I shall give you".  Now given that Vajasravasa is a sage and therefore 
must be true to his word, and Nachiketa being the obedient son that he is, he takes his father quite literally 
and he travels to the land of the dead, a realm ruled by the Hindu deity Yama. 
But when Nachiketa arrives in the realm of the dead, Yama is not there.  He therefore must wait for him.  He 
waits for three nights, each without food or refreshments, and therefore when Yama finally returns, he 
grants Nachiketa three boons or wishes, one for each night that he waited as a guest without his host being 
present.  The first boon Nachiketa asks for requests is that his father no longer be angered with him, and the 
second is for the secret of the fire sacrifice, which leads to heaven and a world without hunger or thirst and 
beyond the reach of sorrow.  Yama grants both boons, and teaches him about the bricks that must be 
constructed and laid out upon the altar properly and precisely how the sacrifice (Agni sacrifice as it is referred 
to in the Vedas) is to be performed in order that it be effective such that the realm of heaven can be attained.
The last boon Nachiketa requests is the knowledge of whether or not the Soul lives on beyond death, a 
request that Yama pleads with him not to pursue, given the subtlety and rarity of such knowledge, 
knowledge that is even rare among the gods.  As Nachiketa puts it, "There is that doubt, when a man is dead -
-some saying, he is; others, he is not.  This I should like to know, taught by thee; this is the third of my 
boons."   Despite the prodding of Yama to choose another boon, anything at all except the nature of the 
Soul beyond death, Nachiketa persists and so begins the teachings of Yama about the nature of the Soul.
The Phaedo on the other hand, is presented by Plato as a conversation regarding the discussion with Socrates 
having taken place on the morning of the day when he is to die, as presented by Phaedo who was supposedly 
present on that day, hence the name of the dialogue (although it circulated in antiquity with the title On the 
Soul as well).  The dialogue starts with some of his followers arriving in his prison cell to find his wife, 
Xanthippe, as well as his son, present and very emotional of course about his impending death.  Socrates 
sends them away however, after which he states cryptically, "What a strange thing, my friends, that seems to 
be which men call pleasure!  How wonderfully it is related to that which seems to be its opposite, pain, in that 
they will not both come to a man at the same time, and yet if he pursues the one and captures it he is 
generally obliged to take the other also, as if the two were joined together in one head." .  
The battle lines being drawn as they were, the topic of taking one's own life comes up, upon which Socrates 
tells the listeners that it is not proper for a man to do so, even a philosopher who deals directly with, 
metaphorically and intellectually speaking, the notion of death quite directly.   This view is challenged by 
two of his students that are present however, and as such, Socrates is forced to lay out a stronger argument 
to defend his case as to why a) the philosopher should not fear death, and b) why it is that he at the same 
time it is not proper that he take his own life.
Socrates then lays out a very direct argument for death being the separation of the Soul from the body, the 
philosopher as one who is interested in the realm of the Soul rather than the physical realm of desire and 
sensation as governed by the body, as well as the acquisition of "pure knowledge" as distinct from the realm 
of the body, laying out as such his basic argument for the theory of forms that comes to represent the core 
part of Plato's metaphysics upon which it can be said that his whole philosophy in no small measure rests.

"Now, how about the acquirement of pure knowledge? Is the body a hindrance or not, if it is made to share in 
the search for wisdom?  What I mean is this: Have the sight and hearing of men any truth in them, or is it true, 
as the poets are always telling us, that we neither hear nor see anything accurately?  And yet if these two 
physical senses are not accurate or exact, the rest are not likely to be, for they are inferior to these. Do you not 
think so?"
"Certainly I do," he replied.
"Then," said he, "when does the soul attain to truth? For when it tries to consider anything in company with the 
body, it is evidently deceived by it."  "True."
"In thought, then, if at all, something of the realities becomes clear to it?"
"Yes."
"But it thinks best when none of these things troubles it, neither hearing nor sight, nor pain nor any pleasure, 
but it is, so far as possible, alone by itself, and takes leave of the body, and avoiding, so far as it can, all 
association or contact with the body, reaches out toward the reality."
"That is true."
"In this matter also, then, the soul of the philosopher greatly despises the body and avoids it and strives to be 
alone by itself?"
"Evidently."
"Now how about such things as this, Simmias?  Do we think there is such a thing as absolute justice, or not?"
"We certainly think there is."
"And absolute beauty and goodness."
"Of course."
"Well, did you ever see anything of that kind with your eyes?"
"Certainly not," said he.
"Or did you ever reach them with any of the bodily senses?  I am speaking of all such things, as size, health, 
strength, and in short the essence or underlying quality of everything.  Is their true nature contemplated by 
means of the body?  Is it not rather the case that he who prepares himself most carefully to understand the true 
essence of each thing that he examines would come nearest to the knowledge of it?"
"Certainly."
"Would not that man do this most perfectly who approaches each thing, so far as possible, with the reason 
alone, not introducing sight into his reasoning nor dragging in any of the other senses along with his thinking, 
but who employs pure, absolute reason in his attempt to search out the pure, absolute essence of things, and 
who removes himself, so far as possible, from eyes and ears, and, in a word, from his whole body, because he 
feels that its companionship disturbs the soul and hinders it from attaining truth and wisdom?  Is not this the 
man, Simmias, if anyone, to attain to the knowledge of reality?" 

Herein we find not only the argument for the reality of Forms, or ideas, over the sensible or material realm - 
the argument for the actual existence of concepts such as "justice", "health", "beauty", etc. - but also Plato's 
assertion, as voiced through Socrates, as to the power of "pure reason" (logos) in the attainment of such 
wisdom (sophia), or the "highest form of knowledge", a domain that is not just akin to, but in fact is 
fundamentally related to, the domain of the Soul, i.e. that which persists beyond death and that which can be 
said to be eternal and everlasting.
Here we find one of the major differences between the two traditions in fact, that Plato appeals to a faculty 
of man, even if it is ethereal or "divine", in the sense that it is that which one can use this faculty to tap into 
the realm of the eternal and unchanging, whereas the Upanishads appeal to a more direct form of knowledge 
which lies beyond reason.  So while the parallels between lower and higher form of knowledge are clear, as is 
at a very basic level the means by which this higher form of knowledge is to be attained - i.e. again the 
withdrawal or rejection of the sensible realm which by its very nature is not eternal, not everlasting but 
perishable and always changing - there is a subtle distinction between the means by which this higher form 
of knowledge is to be realized.  This distinction, albeit subtle, comes to represent more or less the difference 
between these two philosophical traditions as they mature and evolve.  A more rationalistic bent in the 
Western philosophical tradition as it were, while the Upanishadic tradition emphasizes a more direct form of 
knowledge which is beyond reason itself, albeit nonetheless related to some form of intellectual faculty of 
man by which this knowledge is "perceived".
Compare the ideas presented in the Katha Upanishad where this notion of worldly knowledge versus eternal 
knowledge, i.e. wisdom, is distinguished as well:

1. Death said: 'The good is one thing, the pleasant another; these two, having different objects, chain a man.  It 
is well with him who clings to the good; he who chooses the pleasant, misses his end.'
2. 'The good and the pleasant approach man: the wise goes round about them and distinguishes them.  Yea, 
the wise prefers the good to the pleasant, but the fool chooses the pleasant through greed and avarice.'
3. 'Thou, O Nakiketas, after pondering all pleasures that are or seem delightful, hast dismissed them all. Thou 
hast not gone into the road: that leadeth to wealth, in which many men perish.'
4. 'Wide apart and leading to different points are these two, ignorance, and what is known as wisdom.  I believe 
Nakiketas to be one who desires knowledge, for even many pleasures did not tear thee away.
5. 'Fools dwelling in darkness, wise in their own conceit, and puffed up with vain knowledge, go round and 
round, staggering to and fro, like blind men led by the blind.'
6. 'The Hereafter never rises before the eyes of the careless child, deluded by the delusion of wealth.  "This is the 
world," he thinks, "there is no other;"--thus he falls again and again under my sway.' 


In the Katha Upanishad, knowledge of material world, which keeps people under the sway of death, is 
contrasted to a "higher" form of knowledge.  These two forms of knowledge are distinguished, as they are in 
Plato's Phaedo, along the lines of that which is perceived by the senses, i.e. the material world, versus the 
"eternal" world, a world governed by the Soul, what is referred to as Ātman, typically translated as "the Self" 
in the Upanishadic philosophical tradition.  Withdrawal from the realm of the senses - the realm governed by 
the body - is called out specifically in the Katha Upanishad as well as the means by which this eternal wisdom, 
this higher form of knowledge, is to be attained. 

12. 'The wise who, by means of meditation on his Self, recognizes the Ancient, who is difficult to be seen, who 
has entered into the dark, who is hidden in the cave, who dwells in the abyss, as God, he indeed leaves joy and 
sorrow far behind.'
13. 'A mortal who has heard this and embraced it, who has separated from it all qualities, and has thus reached 
the subtle Being, rejoices, because he has obtained what is a cause for rejoicing.  The house (of Brahman) is 
open, I believe, O Nakiketas.'
14. Nakiketas said: 'That which thou seest as neither this nor that, as neither effect nor cause, as neither past 
nor future, tell me that.' 


The means by which this eternal wisdom is attained is describe by Plato as "pure reason", what comes to be 
known as Logos, or Nous, in the Hellenic philosophical tradition as it matures in classical (Western) antiquity, 
which is slightly more nuanced and specific than what is called out in the Upanishadic tradition which is 
somewhat more indirect, i.e. to be attained by this withdrawal of the senses upon which, after instruction 
and guidance from a competent teacher, eternal wisdom and "knowledge" of that which persists beyond 
death, i.e. again "Ātman", is "attained" or "realized".
We see here that causality, and physical reality bound by time, is specifically called out as separate from, or 
distinct from, this higher form of knowledge.  In the Hellenic philosophical tradition, specifically the teachings 
of Aristotle however, causality becomes a cornerstone of philosophical inquiry.  That which defines existence, 
what has come to be known as Aristotle's notion of being qua being.
However, what binds the two traditions, and really characterizes all early philosophical intellectual 
developments not on in the Mediterranean, Near East and Indian subcontinent - what we here are calling 
"Indo-European philosophy" - but also ancient Chinese philosophy as well is the search for, and definition of, 
that which is changeless and eternal versus that which is subject to change, destruction and decay.

18. 'The knowing (Self) [Ātman] is not born, it dies not; it sprang from nothing, nothing sprang from it. The 
Ancient is unborn, eternal, everlasting; he is not killed, though the body is killed.'
19. 'If the killer thinks that he kills, if the killed thinks that he is killed, they do not understand; for this one does 
not kill, nor is that one killed.'
20. 'The Self [Ātman] smaller than small, greater than great, is hidden in the heart of that creature.  A man who 
is free from desires and free from grief, sees the majesty of the Self by the grace of the Creator.'
21. 'Though sitting still, he walks far; though lying down, he goes everywhere.  Who, save myself, is able to 
know that God who rejoices and rejoices not?'
22. 'The wise who knows the Self as bodiless within the bodies, as unchanging among changing things, as great 
and omnipresent, does never grieve.'
23. 'That Self cannot be gained by the Veda, nor by understanding, nor by much learning.  He whom the Self 
chooses, by him the Self can be gained.  The Self chooses him (his body) as his own.'
24. 'But he who has not first turned away from his wickedness, who is not tranquil, and subdued, or whose 
mind is not at rest, he can never obtain the Self (even) by knowledge!' 

To the authors of the Upanishads, this realm is defined by the Soul, i.e. Ātman, and its fundamental identity 
with the ever present and immanent Brahman, what in the Hellenic philosophical tradition comes to be 
known as the World Soul.  

10. 'Beyond the senses there are the objects, beyond the objects there is the mind, beyond the mind there is the 
intellect, the Great Self is beyond the intellect.'
11. 'Beyond the Great there is the Undeveloped, beyond the Undeveloped there is the Person (Puruṣa).  Beyond 
the Person there is nothing--this is the goal, the highest road.'
12. 'That Self is hidden in all beings and does not shine forth, but it is seen by subtle seers through their sharp 
and subtle intellect.'
13. 'A wise man should keep down speech and mind; he should keep them within the Self which is knowledge; 
he should keep knowledge within the Self which is the Great; and he should keep that (the Great) within the Self 
which is the Quiet.'
14. 'Rise, awake! having obtained your boons, understand them!  The sharp edge of a razor is difficult to pass 
over; thus the wise say the path (to the Self) is hard.'
15. 'He who has perceived that which is without sound, without touch, without form, without decay, without 
taste, eternal, without smell, without beginning, without end, beyond the Great, and unchangeable, is freed 
from the jaws of death.'' 

Immortality of the Soul, knowledge of Self - Ātman -  cannot be obtained by learning or lower forms of 
knowledge, or by performing of the sacred rituals or sacrifice, but only by those who have turned away from 
wickedness, who is tranquil and subdued, not moved by worldly desires, whose mind is at rest.

6. 'Having understood that the senses are distinct (from the Âtman), and that their rising and setting (their 
waking and sleeping) belongs to them in their distinct existence (and not to the Âtman), a wise man grieves no 
more.'
7. 'Beyond. the senses is the mind, beyond the mind is the highest (created) Being, higher than that Being is the 
Great Self, higher than the Great, the highest Undeveloped.'
8. 'Beyond the Undeveloped is the Person, the all-pervading and entirely imperceptible.  Every creature that 
knows him is liberated, and obtains immortality.'
9. 'His form is not to be seen, no one beholds him with the eye.  He is imagined by the heart, by wisdom, by the 
mind.  Those who know this, are immortal.'
10. 'When the five instruments of knowledge stand still together with the mind, and when the intellect does not 
move, that is called the highest state.' 

Plato's ethics, epistemology and worldview rests on this theory of forms, or ideas, as reflected by the Allegory 
of the Cave and his views on knowledge as reflected in the analogy of the divided line.  His belief in the 
immortality of the soul and its superiority to the physical body, the idea that evil was a manifestation of the 
ignorance of truth, that only true knowledge can revealed by true virtue, all of these tenets stemmed from 
this idea that the abstract form or idea of a thing was a higher construct than the physical thing itself, and 
that the abstract Form of a thing was just as true and real, if not more so, that the concrete thing itself from 
which its Form manifested.
Furthermore, Plato rests his case as it were, upon the reality of ideas or concepts in and of themselves upon 
which anything in the material world can be known, or depends upon.  It is ideas, forms, such as absolute 
beauty or absolute goodnesss - or absolute justice in the Republic - upon which not only his argument for the 
immortality of the Soul rests but upon which his entire theory of forms consists of.

"But my friends," he said, "we ought to bear in mind, [107c] that, if the soul is immortal, we must care for it, not 
only in respect to this time, which we call life, but in respect to all time, and if we neglect it, the danger now 
appears to be terrible.  For if death were an escape from everything, it would be a boon to the wicked, for when 
they die they would be freed from the body and from their wickedness together with their souls.  But now, since 
the soul is seen to be immortal, it cannot escape [107d] from evil or be saved in any other way than by 
becoming as good and wise as possible.  For the soul takes with it to the other world nothing but its education 
and nurture, and these are said to benefit or injure the departed greatly from the very beginning of his journey 
thither.  And so it is said that after death, the tutelary genius of each person, to whom he had been allotted in 
life, leads him to a place where the dead are gathered together; then they are judged and depart to the other 
world [107e] with the guide whose task it is to conduct thither those who come from this world; and when they 
have there received their due and remained through the time appointed, another guide brings them back after 
many long periods of time.  And the journey is not as Telephus says in the play of Aeschylus; [108a] for he says a 
simple path leads to the lower world, but I think the path is neither simple nor single, for if it were, there would 
be no need of guides, since no one could miss the way to any place if there were only one road.  But really there 
seem to be many forks of the road and many windings; this I infer from the rites and ceremonies practiced here 
on earth.  Now the orderly and wise soul follows its guide and understands its circumstances; but the soul that 
is desirous of the body, as I said before, flits about it, and in the visible world for a long time, [108b] and after 
much resistance and many sufferings is led away with violence and with difficulty by its appointed genius.  And 
when it arrives at the place where the other souls are, the soul which is impure and has done wrong, by 
committing wicked murders or other deeds akin to those and the works of kindred souls, is avoided and 
shunned by all, and no one is willing to be its companion or its guide, [108c] but it wanders about alone in utter 
bewilderment, during certain fixed times, after which it is carried by necessity to its fitting habitation.  But the 
soul that has passed through life in purity and righteousness, finds gods for companions and guides, and goes 
to dwell in its proper dwelling..." 

Here we find, in an albeit allegorical passage of sorts, the notion of ethics and morality presented by Plato 
that rests on the assertion of the reality of forms and through its affiliation with the Soul, which he argues is 
eternal and "immortal", i.e. undying.  This concept of morality which is based upon the immortality of the 
Soul, where the Soul reaps that which it sows in life in the "afterlife" as a permeating theme across not just 
early Hellenic philosophy but also in ancient Egypt as well as in early Indian philosophy as reflected in the 
Vedas and Upanishads.  This notion of karma alongside the doctrine of reincarnation is in fact one of the key 
theo-philosophical notions that underlies early Indian philosophy, and one which we find clear parallels with 
in Plato's Middle dialogues, again most notably Phaedo as indicated in the passages above.   In this sense, 
the notion of the Immortality of the Soul can be viewed as the core binding theo-philosophical principle 
which underlies Indo-European philosophy in virtually all its forms.

No matter what dating of the Upanishads you ascribed to, either a as far back as the early part of the second 
millennium BCE as indicated by some of the more arcane references in the Vedas and corresponding 
archeological evidence, or as a production in the later part of the first millennium BCE which is when the text 
is thought to been initially transcribed, it was clear that the Upanishadic philosophical tradition of the Indo-
Aryans, namely Vedānta, preceded its Hellenic counterpart by some centuries at least.  To what extent the 
Hellenic philosophical systems that blossomed in the second half of the first millennium BCE in Greece 
borrowed from their Indo-Aryan brethren, rather than arising independently and spontaneously as a result of 
the same rebellious forces to religious orthodoxy, is open to scholarly debate.  Nonetheless, it would very be 
hard to argue that both of these rich theo-philosophical systems which developed in the second half of the 
first millennium BCE - one from the Mediterranean under primarily Greek influence and another in the 
Indian subcontinent under primarily Indo-Aryan influence - did not spring from the same common quest for 
true knowledge and understanding of the origins of the cosmos and mankind's place in it by use of power of 
the human mind (and by extension the human spirit), rather than the predisposition to blind faith in age old 
mythological traditions that were protected and guarded by the elite and ruling classes and had been the 
hallmark of religious and political developments since the dawn of civilization. 
It is certainly safe to say that the idea of man being created in the image of God, from which Logos as a 
theological and philosophical construct effectively comes to represent, goes much further back in antiquity 
than Plato, even if it is in Plato's dialogues that we find the first real systemic treatment of this connection.  
Theology, in an anthropomorphic context, was the source from which the natural world was born in Plato's 
view then, even though he points directly to the fundamental unknowable nature of the universe, stating 
that we can only know what it is "like" rather than its true nature.  Furthermore, by establishing the critical 
and comprehensive role of the Soul, both of an individual and for the world at large, Plato rooted his ethical 
and moral framework within his cosmological narrative, i.e. a reason to be good that did not necessarily rely 
on a concept of an afterworld, or hell in the Judeo-Christian (and Zoroastrian) context, as motivation for his 
ethics.  In other words, virtue and justice, their eternally existent forms as it were, and their relationship to 
happiness and the "good life", are means and worthwhile pursuits in and of themselves, given the Soul is 
immortal and given that the just and virtuous life is more pleasant, more rewarding, than the unjust and 
immoral life. 
While this view of the world being fashioned in the image of the creator, so to speak, is reminiscent of the 
Judeo-Christian cosmogonic account as reflected in Genesis, it is also at the same time markedly different in 
its specificity within which its metaphysical framework rests and at the same time explicitly calls out the 
fundamental limits of what can be altogether known about how the universe has come into existence or the 
nature of the creative process as well as what entity or being, anthropomorphic or otherwise, guided this 
creative process.  He simply argues that a) because the world of Becoming is subject to change it must have a 
beginning and b) that there must be a changeless and eternal model from which the world of Becoming is 
shaped from.