
There has been and continues to be much scholarly debate as to what extent the classical Greek 
philosophical tradition, what we call Hellenic philosophy herein, which classically begins with a study of the 
so-called "Pre-Socratics", the bulk of which are Greek in the Hellenic sense of the term (i.e. they spoke and 
wrote in Greek and lived in a region of Greek influence around the Mediterranean), is of specifically and 
distinctively Greek origin.  We find this debate in antiquity as well, where the two sides can be summed up by 
Clement of Alexandria the 2nd century Christian theologian and apologist and Diogenes Laertius, the 3rd 
century CE philosophical historian, respectively.  
From Clement of Alexandria (150-215 CE) in his influential apocryphal work The Stromota (or Miscellanies) a 
reference to the sources and origins of philosophy as a discipline from outside Greece are outlined in some 
detail, pre-dating Greek philosophical development from which the early Hellenic philosophic schools 
borrowed or at the very least were influenced by, calling out not only the Chaldeans, Persians (Magi) and 
Jews, but also the Indian philosophical schools as well (Brahminical tradition as well as Buddha himself).


Zoroaster the Magus, Pythagoras showed to be a Persian.  Of the secret books of this man, those who follow 
the heresy of Prodicus boast to be in possession.  Alexander, in his book On the Pythagorean Symbols, relates 
that Pythagoras was a pupil of Nazaratus the Assyrian a (some think that he is Ezekiel; but he is not, as will 
afterwards be shown), and will have it that, in addition to these, Pythagoras was a hearer of the Galatae and 
the Brahmins.
...
Numa the king of the Romans was a Pythagorean, and aided by the precepts of Moses, prohibited from making 
an image of God in human form, and of the shape of a living creature.  Accordingly, during the first hundred 
and seventy years, though building temples, they made no cast or graven image.  For Numa secretly showed 
them that the Best of Beings could not be apprehended except by the mind alone.  Thus philosophy, a thing of 
the highest utility, flourished in antiquity among the barbarians, shedding its light over the nations.  And 
afterwards it came to Greece.  

First in its ranks were the prophets of the Egyptians; and the Chaldeans among the Assyrians; and the Druids 
among the Gauls; and the Samanaeans among the Bactrians; and the philosophers of the Celts; and the Magi 
of the Persians, who foretold the Saviour's birth, and came into the land of Judaea guided by a star.  The Indian 
gymnosophists are also in the number, and the other barbarian philosophers.  And of these there are two 
classes, some of them called Sarmanae, and others Brahmins.  And those of the Sarmanae who are called 
Hylobii neither inhabit cities, nor have roofs over them, but are clothed in the bark of trees, feed on nuts, and 
drink water in their hands. Like those called Encratites in the present day, they know not marriage nor 
begetting of children.  Some, too, of the Indians obey the precepts of Buddha; whom, on account of his 
extraordinary sanctity, they have raised to divine honours. 

In his prologue to his famed and influential work Lives of Eminent Philosophers Diogenes Laertius denies such 
assertions, establishing the very foundations of what is sometimes referred to as le miracle grec, or the belief 
that philosophy as a rational discipline is an altogether uniquely Greek "invention" as it were.

There are some who say that the study of philosophy had its beginning among the barbarians.  They urge that 
the Persians have had their Magi, the Babylonians or Assyrians their Chaldaeans, and the Indians their 
Gymnosophists; and among the Celts and Gauls there are the people called Druids or Holy Ones, for which they 
cite as authorities the Magicus of Aristotle and Sotion in the twenty-third book of his Succession of 
Philosophers.  Also they say that Mochus was a Phoenician, Zamolxis a Thracian, and Atlas a Libyan.  If we 
may believe the Egyptians, Hephaestus was the son of the Nile, and with him philosophy began, priests and 
prophets being its chief exponents.  Hephaestus lived 48,863 years before Alexander of Macedon, and in the 
interval there occurred 373 solar and 832 lunar eclipses.  The date of the Magians, beginning with Zoroaster 
the Persian, was 5000 years before the fall of Troy, as given by Hermodorus the Platonist in his work on 
mathematics; but Xanthus the Lydian reckons 6000 years from Zoroaster to the expedition of Xerxes, and after 
that event he places a long line of Magians in succession, bearing the names of Ostanas, Astrampsychos, 
Gobryas, and Pazatas, down to the conquest of Persia by Alexander.  These authors forget that the 
achievements which they attribute to the barbarians belong to the Greeks, with whom not merely philosophy 
but the human race itself began. 


So while we find Diogenes Laertius pointing to a potentially broad and extensive reach for the potential 
origins of Hellenic philosophy, and the works of the Pre-Socratics in particular, he himself, no doubt reflecting 
the traditional beliefs of the Greco-Roman intellectuals of his day, dismisses the theory of the external source 
of the Hellenic philosophical tradition out of hand despite the acknowledgement given to outside influences 
by other prominent intellectuals of the time as reflected by Clement of Alexandria's sentiments quoted 
above.  Hence, we see here illustrated and reflected the long-standing belief that philosophy as a pure 
intellectual pursuit of wisdom is an altogether "Greek" invention, what Staal refers to as le miracle grec .  
This question is of course of particular significance to one of the major themes and hypotheses of this work 
as we try and ascertain as much as is reasonably possible given the scarcity of the textual and archeological 
evidence from this time period of history to what extent these various theo-philosophical developments 
throughout the classical period in Eurasian antiquity can be said to be of common origin or common 
descent. 
Perhaps the most well understood and firmly established intellectual theory of cultural diffusion and 
evolution from this period of antiquity within the geographic region which classical "Hellenic" culture 
emerged can be found from the academic discipline of linguistics, or the study of (spoken) languages.  Almost 
all modern scholarship surrounding the study of language groups languages into various families, each family 
being related by a theoretical ancestor which it is believed that all the languages from that family originated 
from or in some way are closely associated from, making all languages within a given family either sibling 
languages or cousins so to speak.  
One can make a strong case that language and culture, as we understand it and as can be defined as the set 
of ideas, concepts or principles that connect a given set of people or society from a given region, are in fact 
synonymous.  Or if not synonymous, then very closely related.  And it is from the study of ancient (and 
modern) language families that the close association between the ancient Greeks, the Hellenes, which are 
attributed with the "discovery" of philosophy, and their neighbors to the East - what much of the academic 
literature classifies as the "Orient" or "Oriental" but what we prefer to classify as "Eastern" to more closely 
align the designation with the relative geographical designation -  can perhaps best be illustrated.

 
Figure 25: Pie chart of world languages by percentage of speakers 

The two families of interest from this time period of antiquity in the regions we are studying (Eurasia) are 
Sino-Tibetan, a family of more than 400 languages spoken in East, Southeast and South Asia (of which 
Chinese is a member), which is second in terms of number of (modern) speakers only to the Indo-European 
language family which is widely spoken today in almost all of Europe, in Western and Southern Asia (and in 
turn the Americas) and of which all modern Romance languages, English included, are classified as a member 
of.   
Ancient Greek, the languages spoken in Anatolia (what is now Turkey) as well as ancient Sanskrit and ancient 
Persian are all in the Indo-European language family and all share not just a similar structure and design but 
also share many cognates, or word meanings, across a variety of areas that indicate and speak to the similar 
cultural background of all of these ancient people who (again in theory) all come from a similar background, 
at least linguistically speaking - in other words who all share a common linguistic, and therefore intellectual, 
heritage.  For again the premise here is that language and ideas, and in turn culture, are all very closely 
related and affiliated psychological and socio-political phenomena.
Common cognates across these ancient languages are words for kinship (mother, father, sister, brother, etc.), 
numbers (one, two three, four, ten, one hundred, etc.), animals (cow, horse, sheep, mouse, pig, wolf, etc.), 
agriculture (grain, field, honey, salt, to plow, to sow, etc.), body parts and processes (eye, ear, tooth, knee, 
bone, blood, tongue, foot, to breathe, to sweat, to eat, to drink, to live, to die, to know, to find, to see, to 
think, to say, to ask, etc.), natural features and phenomena (star, sky, fire, wind, snow, light, dark, water, 
earth, moon, sun, wood, tree, hot, cold, etc.) and a variety of other concepts that can be loosely categorized 
as "human".  All of these words, ideas and principles reflect symbolically and linguistically, and again socially 
and culturally, the society and culture within which these languages were spoken and in theory if we believe 
the linguistic theory itself of language families and evolution, originated in this geographic region - a 
geographic region which essentially covers (Western) Eurasia in antiquity.   
While dating this common ancestral language from which all Indo-European languages are believed to have 
derived from in some form or another is not an exact science by any means, and it is not even widely held 
that in fact a common ancestral language (typically referred to as Proto-Indo-European) was ever actually 
spoken by anyone, based upon the current archeological and linguistic evidence, one can postulate that 
these word forms and the semantics and syntax of the basic structure of Indo-European languages was 
developed somewhere in the 4th millennium BCE (give or take a thousand years) and originated and 
disseminated form a region that is centrally located to where the languages were spoken, i.e. somewhere 
between the Near East/Asia Minor and the Indian subcontinent from which these Indo-European languages 
"diffused" or spread, and from which the various dialects or subfamilies of languages within that family 
developed and evolved.
As an example of how this dating of this Proto-Indo-European language from which the Indo-European 
languages derived and how they all came to share many of the same words and ideas, one can look at the 
development of the Romance languages and how they evolved from the Vulgar Latin language which was the 
lingua franca of the Roman Empire.  It took some two thousand years for this early Latin dialect to evolve into 
the modern languages such as French, Portuguese, Romanian and Italian which all belong to the Italic family 
of Indo-European languages.  If we use this as a benchmark of sorts, using modern languages as an analogy to 
the Indo-European, one could argue that it took at least two thousand years for the Indo-European languages 
to develop from whichever language they presumably originated and derived from.  In reality though, the 
rate of progression and evolution of languages from this time period in antiquity was arguably much slower 
than the last two thousand years (if we presume the rate of evolution runs parallel to the rate of the 
development and evolution of society and civilization for example) which would tack on an extra thousand 
years at least just in terms of how long they might have taken to evolve.  This in turn would mean that given 
that Indo-European languages were spoken in the 2nd millennium and early part of the first millennium BCE, if 
we assume based upon the preceding logic that they took roughly three thousand years to develop, it places 
this Indo-European parent tongue, again called Proto-Indo-European, in roughly the 5th millennium BCE or so. 
 

 
Figure 26: Classification of Indo-European languages. 

It is from linguistics in fact that the close association between for example Vedic Sanskrit and ancient Persian 
(Avestan) is found, showing the close relationship between not just these two languages but of course the 
people that spoke them, people whose theological and religious beliefs are captured in some of the oldest 
extant literature known to man, i.e. the Persian Avesta and the Indian Vedas, and through which can be 
ascertained many similar cultural, social and religious beliefs, lending further credence to the linguistic theory 
itself.
The Indo-Iranian sub branch of Indo-European languages includes the languages of the ancient Persians and 
Indians, basically the languages spoken by the people and societies that lived in modern Iran and India. This 
branch includes two sub-branches, Indic (Indo-Aryan) and Iranian.  The former classification includes ancient 
languages such as Vedic Sanskrit (the language of the Rigvéda) and its child language Sanskrit (the language 
of the later Vedas) as well as modern languages spoken in India such as Hindi, Punjabi, and Bengali.  The 
Iranian sub branch of Indo-Iranian languages include ancient languages such as Old Avestan, sometimes 
called Gathic Avestan which is the language from the oldest strata of the Avesta, or Gathas, Old Persian 
which was the primary language spoken in the Achaemenid Empire), Avestan which is the language of the 
later Avesta Zoroastrian literature, as well as languages from Iranian/Persian later antiquity such as Middle 
Persian and Parthian, and modern languages such as Farsi (modern Persian), Kurdish and Pashto which are 
spoken in modern day Iraq, Iran, Afghanistan and Tajikistan.  
Ancient Greek, part of the Hellenic sub branch of Indo-European languages, was spoken in various dialects 
throughout the Aegean and Peloponnese peninsula in the latter part of the second millennium BCE and 
throughout the first millennium BCE.  It is perhaps best known in its Athenian dialect form referred to as 
"Attic", which is the language of the Homeric epics as well as the language of the early Greek philosophers .  
Classical Latin, the Latin dialect used by authors such as Ovid, Cicero, Seneca and Marcus Aurelius, and its 
successor tongues Vulgar and Ecclesiastical Latin which became the predominant languages of the Roman 
Empire, both also belong to the Indo-European language family, under Italic branch of Indo-European 
languages, sister and cousin languages to the Hellenic tongues.  Again, all modern Romance languages such 
as Romanian, Italian, French, Spanish, Danish, German, etc. all originate from Vulgar Latin language, the 
lingua franca of the Roman Empire. 
This development of philosophy itself runs parallel not coincidentally to the development and proliferation of 
writing throughout the region of Hellenic influence.  For the development and exploration of ideas and 
concepts which came to be grouped together under the heading of philosophy, as distinguished from the 
mythological tradition which preceded it (again as reflected by the writings attributed to Homer and Hesiod), 
arguably required an advanced system of writing within which these complex sets of ideas and their 
interrelationships could be explored.  In other words, in order for the oral tradition which was characterized 
by myth and parable and compressed verse based language which facilitated the faithful transmission of 
theo-philosophical ideas from generation to generation to evolve into a more complex and fuller system of 
philosophy, a written language and an intellectual tradition surrounding the writings of various thinkers is 
absolutely necessary.  In fact, one could argue that Platonic philosophy itself, as it survives down to us in its 
classic dialogue form, illustrates this very fact - i.e. oral transmission of ideas explored through what has 
come to be called dialectic by Aristotle and what is referred to typically as Socratic method in Plato's works in 
and of itself shows how a complex system of philosophy can be constructed from the exploration, and 
documentation, of ideas in written form.
It is no accident that as the Greek alphabet system, from which the Roman alphabet originated from, which 
was "invented" in the 8th and 7th centuries, a system borrowed from the Phoenicians (i.e. the Phoenician 
alphabet from which the Greek alphabet evolved from), becomes prevalent at the same time that the 
Homeric epics are written down, and in turn marks the beginning of the Hellenic philosophical tradition.  For 
again writing itself is a necessary condition (not necessary and sufficient) for the development of philosophy. 

To summarize then, as we look at the attempt at the very beginnings of philosophical inquiry, of rational 
thought really, in the second half of the first millennium BCE more or less, we find similar developments - 
both culturally and technologically - that support this advancement, this intellectual revolution if we may call 
it that, across virtually all of Eurasia.  In each of these respective geographic and socio-political centers within 
which civilization emerges, we see an attempt by each of these peoples, the first philosophers, to attempt to 
answer various questions about the nature of reality and the "universe", its component parts and pieces, as 
well as how best the individual, as well as the society and people at large, are to live within this 
(fundamentally theological, i.e. "divine") world.  This enquiry happens almost simultaneously from amongst 
the various social, political, linguistic and of course "intellectual" traditions which emerge at this very unique 
time in our history - what some call the Axial Age given that in a very real sense it represents the time period 
which many of the foundational aspects of civilized society emerged.  
We find these similar lines of enquiry, the manifestation of the same intellectual journey to a large extent, in 
the Hellenic theo-philosophical tradition to the West, in the Upanishadic and early Indian philosophical 
tradition on the Indian subcontinent to the East and even to the Far East in ancient China in the Far East, each 
of which started to formulate, in writing, their own conception of reality, what today in philosophical circles 
we would refer to as an ontology, as well as the boundaries of what can be said to be real or true, what is 
referred to as epistemology in modern philosophical circles.  
In its initial formulation, at least with respect to lasting influence and persistence of teachings, in the West, in 
the Hellenic theo-philosophical tradition, this intellectual endeavor takes shape in the works of Plato as his 
theory of forms , which ultimately leads to his notion of the Good , establishing the intellectual, and 
metaphysical, foundations of Christianity and monotheism.  
To the East on the Indian subcontinent, similar intellectual efforts were underway, and in what has come to 
be known as the Indian theo-philosophical tradition, and in the Upanishads in particular, the core 
metaphysical (and theological) constructs of Ātman and Brahman were established, each of which is akin to 
and mapped directly with the notion of what we in the West have come to refer to as "Soul", one at the 
individual level and another at the cosmic level.  In the Far East, an alternative metaphysical and ontological 
picture emerges, where emphasis is on the notion of change, cycle, and process - what comes to be known 
as the Dao, or simply the "Way" - rather than on any one substance, principle, form or idea.  
In each of these traditions however, the notion of the emergence of the physical universe, along with 
mankind itself, out of some kind of divine, cosmic, creative event, which in turn is presided over by some type 
of divine, immortal being (i.e. a god or gods) is an integral part of the respective belief system, even if it is not 
explicitly called out or emphasized as such.  Furthermore, in each of these traditions, the idea of some 
immortal or persistent entity that is tied or affiliated to an individual person that persists beyond death is 
also presumed and fully integrated into the respective belief system, even if it again is manifest, referred to 
or called, something different and/or it is given a different emphasis, in each of the theo-philosophical 
systems from antiquity across Eurasia.
The primary distinction however between what we shall refer to as Indo-European philosophy  and 
effectively the theo-philosophical systems of the Far East, is the emphasis on the notion of the Soul not just 
as an ontological predicate upon which reality is perceived, but also as a cornerstone metaphysical and 
intellectual construct from which reality is effectively defined.  
This idea of the Soul, and its preeminent place within the ontology of the theo-philosophical systems in 
question, one of the unique elements of what we are calling Indo-European theo-philosophy, can be found 
for example in both the Hellenic theo-philosophical system, in all its variants in fact, as well as the Indian, or 
Upanishadic, theo-philosophical traditions.  The reality, and immortality, of the Soul plays a significant role in 
the overall theo-philosophical system articulated by Plato, as a metaphysical entity that exists as the form, or 
underlying idea, of a person or human being, and also as the underlying metaphysical principle upon which 
Plato's notion of virtue, or excellence (arête) is based, upon which both his ethical as well as political 
philosophy rests in fact.  The notion of Ātman, the Indian theo-philosophical corollary to the Hellenic Soul, 
plays a very similar role theo-philosophically in fact, being perceived as an immortal construct which 
underpins not just the individual person or psyche (jiva), but also represents the cornerstone principle or 
idea, metaphysical construct, upon which its system of ethics is based.  
In contrast, in the Chinese theo-philosophical tradition, which is not of Indo-European heritage or descent, 
while a notion of ancestral spirit is no doubt present , it does not carry the same ontological or 
metaphysical significance as it does in the theo-philosophical systems we are categorizing, again along 
linguistic (and in turn intellectual and ultimately theological) lines, as "Indo-European" .  We do not find in 
the Chinese theo-philosophical tradition for example, the same ontological emphasis on this construct of the 
Soul, that element or component of the person or human being which persists beyond death, that we find in 
its Western theo-philosophical counterparts, even if it can be argued that the role of the realm of spirit and 
the existence of some form of life associated with individual existence does in fact persist beyond death . 
The Indo-European theo-philosophical tradition also subsumes this idea of the anthropomorphic creator, 
even as it evolves in later renditions to more of an abstract concept rather than an anthropomorphic deity 
per se.  As we find in the Hellenic theo-philosophical tradition as the penultimate god in the pantheon, i.e. 
Zeus, which morphs into the more abstract metaphysical notion of the Good, or the Cosmic Soul of Plato.  We 
also find similarly in the Indian theo-philosophical tradition, the Vedic, anthropomorphic deity Puruṣa or 
Brahmā, which morphs into the more abstract concept of Brahman in the Upanishads.
This notion of universal creation by some anthropomorphic being, or god, also persists into the Abrahamic 
monotheistic traditions as well, the notion of a single anthropomorphic deity resting of course at the very 
heart of the Judeo-Christian theological tradition as Yahweh in the Old Testament or simply God in the New 
Testament, and also manifesting in the Islamic theo-philosophical tradition as Allāh, the primordial one true 
God of the Qurʾān.  
The strength and persistence of the Abrahamic religions which are a hallmark of the theological 
developments in the West in the first millennium CE in fact arguably stems not from their unique 
characteristics necessarily, their relative truth as you might say, but due to the continuity and proliferation of 
these characteristically Indo-European theo-philosophical belief systems that had already been present 
throughout the geographic and cultural landscape within which these monotheistic belief systems took root - 
the seeds had been sown to a large degree, prior to the inception and spread of monotheism throughout the 
Mediterranean initially and then through and throughout the Roman Empire eventually.
In other words, a case can be made that as (Abrahamic) monotheism evolved and spread, it found that the 
people and societies were already conceptually, and to a large extent theologically, prepared for the next 
step in religious evolution as it were - the jump from a pre-historic, myth based narrative with many gods and 
deities representing many different forms or aspects of nature, to a more idealistic and abstract metaphysical 
system where the universe in all its forms was thought to have emanated, or originated, from a single divine 
anthropomorphic figure that ultimately held dominion over the entire world order.  In this broader 
intellectual context, Plato's concept of universal creation, emanation really, that we find in the Timaeus for 
example, can be seen as a more allegorical interpretation, a close relative as it were, to the of the universal 
creation story that we find in Genesis, as opposed to a wholly distinctive take on universal creation.