
Two of the most influential Greek philosophical traditions in antiquity, in both the Hellenic period as well as 
the period of Roman influence and domination, were Stoicism and Epicureanism, the former of which 
exerted considerable influence on early Christian theology, which in turn was influenced by Jewish 
theological development during the same time, most notably seen in the work of Philo of Alexandria.  The 
Stoic and Epicurean philosophical systems survive down to us in fragments and pieces for the most part, in 
contrast to the more complete philosophical systems and works that survive down to us from the Platonic 
and Peripatetic (Aristotle) schools.  For example, the (Middle) Platonic philosopher and historian Plutarch 
from the 2nd century CE, who incidentally was also a priest at Delphi, wrote a quite few works that criticize 
Stoicism from which we gain important insights into its underlying philosophy.  We also find material related 
to Stoicism and Epicureanism in the works of the philosophical biographer Diogenes Laertius from the third 
century CE who was the author of Lives of Eminent Philosophers, a comprehensive treatise which included 
extensive autobiographical as well as philosophical summaries of virtually all of the major ancient Greek 
philosophers and schools - Stoic, Platonic and Epicurean being three schools which he covers in great detail.
One cannot ignore the underlying socio-political context which drove these philosophical, really scientific, 
developments.  With the advent of first the Persian Empire and then the Macedonian Empire in the middle 
and latter half of the first millennium BCE, we see the lines of communication, exchange and trade routes 
open up which bridged the ancient populations of the Macedonians, the Romans, the Greeks, the Egyptians, 
the Chaldeans (Palestine and Israel region today) and of course the Persians.    The cultural and 
philosophical epicenters of these developments were, as they are today, forged in urban centers of learning, 
most notably of course first in Athens, then in Alexandria in northern Egypt, and then in turn in Rome as the 
Roman and Latin culture began to dominate the intellectual landscape in the first few centuries CE.  
Alexandria in particular saw the development of profound intellectual and philosophical development, where 
most if not all of the most influential ancient philosophers and theologians lived and studied to a large extent 
between the second century BCE and the second century CE.  This was of course the home of the great 
Library of Alexandria, perhaps the greatest legacy of Alexander, and the place where the Hebrew Old 
Testament was translated into Greek, the famed Septuagint (or simply LXX), and where early Christianity first 
took shape as reflected in the works the esteemed Jewish philosopher Philo of Alexandria (also known as 
Philo Judaeus) who lived and wrote around the time of Christ, Clement of Alexandria who wrote and taught 
in the 2nd and third centuries CE, and Origen also of Alexandria who is believed to have studied with and was 
greatly influenced by Clement.  Clement and Origin were some of the first Christian theologians to interpret 
the Gospels in light of the Hellenic philosophical tradition, building on the work of Philo who had analyzed 
and encapsulated Old Testament wisdom in the light of Hellenic philosophy.
This period represented a melting pot of theological dialogue and development, perhaps best described as 
the enlightenment era of philosophy in antiquity and it is no accident that it is from this period that perhaps 
the greatest religious figure in the history of mankind emerges, Jesus of Nazareth.  It was a time when all of 
the significant religious traditions (philosophy) of the Mediterranean, Near East and Egypt were assimilated 
by some of the best minds in antiquity, an assimilation that occurred at the same time as advanced 
civilization was starting to blossom, and language and writing - and the existence of extensive libraries - 
began to manifest in the ancient world, giving philosophers and historians alike access to broad expanses of 
knowledge across an extensive cultural landscape, granting a perspective on history and theology, and 
science which at that time encompassed theology, that was unmatched in all of mankind's history up to that 
point.  Perhaps it's not too much of an exaggeration to say that it was a time when Reason began to take 
prominence over ritual and myth as the predominant determining factor that shaped religious thought, 
where all knowledge was looked upon as a single system and body of work that must hang together 
cohesively, and where ethics was considered a branch of science just as important as physics.  This is the 
legacy of the ancient Greeks to the West.
The philosophers of this era looked upon the mythology of the ancient peoples, their cosmologies that were 
wrapped in fable and epic poetry, as allegories for the ascent of the Soul, not as true stories that explained 
the inner workings of Nature as some modern historians would have us believe.  This was the "secret" that 
was kept by the priests of the major sects of the ancient world, with whom the philosophers studied, and 
what they attempted to encapsulate and describe in whatever form they deemed most appropriate.  Plato 
wrote in a form of literary prose know as Socratic Dialogue, hiding more abstract and esoteric teachings to a 
large extent perhaps because he was concerned the same fate of Socrates might befall him or perhaps 
because he thought that the ancient wisdom he was trying to convey was most appropriately done wrapped 
in allegory and dialectic so that the wisdom and elegance of the teaching, which he believed was beyond 
words, could be conveyed as best as possible.  Aristotle was more direct in his approach, more scientific to 
the modern reader, and perhaps because of this not terribly popular to the everyday man in antiquity that 
still had an appreciation for myth and allegory - at least certainly not as popular as the Stoic and Epicurean 
schools which had significant followings in the aristocracy and the middle class of antiquity respectively .

With the proliferation of Hellenic philosophy in classical (Western) antiquity from the 3rd century BCE to the 
first few centuries after the death of Jesus and the advent of early Christianity, the most prominent theo-
philosophical systems in the Mediterranean are (primarily) Middle Platonism and Stoicism, both of which 
inform early Christianity in many respects - in the canonical Gospels in particular which show clear Hellenic 
philosophical influence not surprisingly.  In this period of theological history in the generations following the 
death of Christ, the focus turns toward interpretation of these books which stemmed from the tradition 
surrounding Jesus's life and teachings from which the New Testament canon was constructed by the early 
Church, as well as in turn the Old Testament to which the early Christians turned for their legitimacy and 
historicity, within the context of the firmly established Hellenic philosophical tradition which had been 
adopted by the intellectual and academic community of the Greco-Roman world. 
In the works of the early Christian apologists and theologians, we find the exploration of the notion of good 
and evil, fate versus free will, salvation, the meaning of Christ and his resurrection, the role of wisdom and 
law, etc. as reflected in the Old Testament canon and the New Testament books all within the philosophical 
and metaphysical framework of the Hellenic tradition that preceded it.  In these early phases of Christianity, 
before the doctrine of the Trinity is established in fact, the role of reason, what the early philosophers 
referred to in the abstract as Logos, begins to be interpreted as a sort of hand of God so to speak.  Only later, 
as the doctrine of the Trinity becomes more mature and is firmly established in Christian orthodoxy, is Christ 
himself looked upon as a manifestation of this Logos in human form.  This is the so-called "Word of God" who 
becomes "flesh" in the Gospel of John (which was written in Greek of course as were all the Gospels).

1 In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God.
2 The same was in the beginning with God.
3 All things were made by him; and without him was not any thing made that was made.
4 In him was life; and the life was the light of men.
5 And the light shineth in darkness; and the darkness comprehended it not.
6 There was a man sent from God, whose name was John.
7 The same came for a witness, to bear witness of the Light, that all men through him might believe.
8 He was not that Light, but was sent to bear witness of that Light.
9 That was the true Light, which lighteth every man that cometh into the world.
10 He was in the world, and the world was made by him, and the world knew him not.
11 He came unto his own, and his own received him not.
12 But as many as received him, to them gave he power to become the sons of God, even to them that believe 
on his name:
13 Which were born, not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God.
14 And the Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, (and we beheld his glory, the glory as of the only 
begotten of the Father,) full of grace and truth.
15 John bare witness of him, and cried, saying, This was he of whom I spake, He that cometh after me is 
preferred before me: for he was before me.
16 And of his fulness have all we received, and grace for grace.
17 For the law was given by Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ.
18 No man hath seen God at any time, the only begotten Son, which is in the bosom of the Father, he hath 
declared him. 

In these 18 initial verses of John, sometimes referred to collectively as the "Prologue", we find perhaps more 
so than in any other place in the New Testament - in particular in the first few verses - this Hellenic 
philosophical interpretation of the meaning of (the Jewish) Christ as interpreted via the Logos, i.e. the 
"Word".
In this oft quoted passage, we see here not only very close references and analogues to Genesis , but also a 
classically Stoic, or perhaps better put a classically Hellenic philosophical interpretation of the birth and 
teachings of Jesus, ignoring the reference to John the Baptist which plays a central role here clearly in John's 
conception of setting the stage for the tale of the life of Jesus.  The Gospels of Matthew, Mark and Luke are 
known collectively as the "Synoptic Gospels" because they share many of the same characteristics and story 
line, but the Gospel of John, sometimes called the "Gnostic Gospel", is unique in its conception and 
interpretation of the life and teachings of Jesus, drawing insights from the more esoteric and mystical 
traditions surrounding early Christian followers, schools which were categorized as "Gnostic" by the early 
Christian Church Fathers and apologists and schools which drew inspiration from the Hellenic philosophical 
tradition, the Platonic school most notably.
Within the context of later Christian theological development, we see a clear shift away from the view of the 
supremacy of reason over God, and a focus more on salvation through Christ.  The tradition almost inverts 
the priority with the doctrine of the Trinity, where reason is not the pinnacle of metaphysics as it is in the 
Neo-Platonic tradition quite explicitly and in the Peripatetic tradition implicitly, but reason , again Logos or 
what has come to be known as the "Word", is looked upon as a medium through which the power of the 
Trinity moves through man, and is personified in the Son of God, Jesus, who is the one and only savior of 
mankind.
In exploring this notion of what has come down to us as the "Word" in New Testament and Christian canon 
and theology, and its place within the tripartite theology of the Christians (the Trinity), it's important to have 
a clear notion as to the history and context of the term as it used by the author of John, and its meaning 
within the philosophical community from within which it emerges in the first few centuries after Christ, 
particularly in the Gnostic tradition which was shunned by later Christians as heretical but which exerted at 
least some influence over early Christian theological development, even if only as a point of reference for its 
critics. 
Perhaps the most fleshed out philosophical notion of Logos in the Judeo-Christian tradition can be found in 
the work of Philo of Alexandria (c.20 BCE - 40CE), aka Philo Judaeus, a Jewish philosopher who synthesized 
the tradition of Moses as reflected in the Old Testament directly into the Hellenic philosophical tradition, 
landing on the idea of Logos as one of the core theological and philosophical principles upon which his 
theological scheme rested, a scheme which placed Moses as the most revered and esteemed of all 
philosophers in antiquity.  Interestingly, Philo's works were mainly conserved in the Christian theological 
tradition despite his Jewish heritage and that the main thrust of his teachings were the legitimization and 
synthesis of the teachings of Moses (Pentateuch) into Hellenic philosophy, even going so far as to suggest 
that the Greek philosophical tradition borrowed from the Jewish sage rather than emerging independently.  
Philo's work can be roughly categorized between his Old Testament exegesis and commentary and his more 
philosophical treatises that dealt with more classical philosophical problems such as ethics, of the problem of 
Free Will, the nature of the soul, etc.  A good summary of his doctrine of Logos and its influence on 
subsequent Christian theological development can be found in the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy entry 
on Philo:

The pivotal and the most developed doctrine in Philo's writings on which hinges his entire 
philosophical system, is his doctrine of the Logos.  By developing this doctrine he fused Greek 
philosophical concepts with Hebrew religious thought and provided the foundation for Christianity, 
first in the development of the Christian Pauline myth and speculations of John, later in the Hellenic 
Christian Logos and Gnostic doctrines of the second century.  All other doctrines of Philo hinge on his 
interpretation of divine existence and action....

In the Septuagint version of the Old Testament the term logos (Hebrew davar) was used frequently 
to describe God's utterances (Gen. 1:3, 6,9; 3:9,11; Ps. 32:9), God's action (Zech. 5:1-4; Ps. 106:20; 
Ps. 147:15), and messages of prophets by means of which God communicated his will to his people 
(Jer. 1:4-19, 2:1-7; Ezek. 1:3; Amos 3:1).  Logos is used here only as a figure of speech designating 
God's activity or action. ...

The Greek, metaphysical concept of the Logos is in sharp contrast to the concept of a personal God 
described in anthropomorphic terms typical of Hebrew thought.  Philo made a synthesis of the two 
systems and attempted to explain Hebrew thought in terms of Greek philosophy by introducing the 
Stoic concept of the Logos into Judaism.  In the process the Logos became transformed from a 
metaphysical entity into an extension of a divine and transcendental anthropomorphic being and 
mediator between God and men.  Philo offered various descriptions of the Logos. 

The general academic and scholarly consensus appears to be that Philo's philosophical and allegorical 
(allegoresis) work is not necessarily innovative in and of itself per se, but more reflects the current thinking 
among Jewish scholars in his day.  But it is Philo's work that survived however, again preserved primarily 
through the early Christian theological and philosophical tradition which leaned on Philo to establish the 
wisdom and authenticity of the Old Testament within the context of the Hellenic philosophical tradition 
which was the dominant intellectual current of the time.  
Philo Judaeus was a product of the intellectual melting pot of Alexandria which we know had strong ties to 
Hellenic philosophy, his writings show clear signs of this.  But at the same time, Philo is first and foremost a 
Jewish scholar.  His work is an exegesis of Jewish tradition, mythology and history in the light of Hellenic 
philosophy which was considered to be the intellectual benchmark of the times.  His work to a large extent is 
meant to establish Moses as one of the great philosophers of antiquity and his allegorical interpretation of 
Genesis for example follows the lines of the Greek philosophic tradition of interpreting mythology 
allegorically, referred to in the academic literature as allegoresis, a tradition that was well established by the 
time of Philo.
With Philo Judaeus we do have a significant break from the more orthodox Jewish interpretation of the Old 
Testament however.  This ancient Jewish theological and historical narrative is captured in the (Hebrew) Old 
Testament and covers the history of the Jewish people roughly from 2000 BCE to 350 BCE or so.  It starts from 
the moment of creation to the world of primordial man/woman and their expulsion from the Garden of Eden 
as described in Genesis which as most are familiar with and then moves on to describe the history and 
lineage of the Jewish people up to the time of Moses, the great prophet of the Jewish people and the main 
figure, and supposed author, of the first Five Books of the Old Testament, sometimes called the Pentateuch in 
the Greek historical tradition.  The narrative describes the exodus of the Jewish people out of Egypt, led out 
to freedom of course by Moses himself, all the way down to the formulation of the state of Israel and the 
construction of the First and Second Temples in the first half of the first millennium BCE. 
This long period of Jewish history effectively comes to an end with the life and times of Jesus of Nazareth, his 
life and teachings, and the (orthodox) interpretation thereof of course captured in the New Testament 
scripture, works that reflect a significant Hellenic influence not just linguistically (there were written in Greek 
using the Greek language) but also philosophically as subsequent theologians incorporate the mysterious role 
of the living Christ into their Abrahamic monotheistic tradition, i.e. enter Christianity.
All of this history, representing the lineage and trials and faith of the Jewish people, is captured in the Old 
Testament, in Hebrew, and in it we find the core tenets of the Jewish faith stemming in large part from the 
covenant that Yahweh makes with Moses when he leads the Jewish people out of Egypt, i.e. the Ten 
Commandments, and the introduction of the Torah or "law" which is captured primarily in the Five Books of 
Moses and is established to guide the Jewish people, a people that are distinguished by their long history of 
trials and tribulations and exile from, and re-establishment of their homeland in modern day Israel and their 
three thousand year relationship with the Temple of Jerusalem, a place that not only plays a significant role 
in the Old Testament but also of course continues to play a significant role in Middle East politics even today.   
It is in the Torah that we find seeds of all of the Abrahamic religions which are so prevalent in the world 
today, representing more than two-thirds the global population.  But this history and culture, the language 
(Hebrew), the mythology, etc. becomes deeply Hellenized starting in the 3rd century BCE after Alexander the 
Great conquers Israel/Judea and incorporates the land into the Macedonian Empire, marking the beginning 
of the period of Greek influence over the Middle East and Northern Africa (Egypt primarily) and establishing 
the social and political foundations for Western civilization. 
This Hellenization process of Judaism, which lays the groundwork for the later interpretations of the life and 
teachings of Jesus of Nazareth and the advent of Christianity, has essentially two parallel transformations 
that take place in the last half of the first millennium BCE.  The first path is represented by the writings that 
are accepted within the orthodox Jewish community that reflect (relatively later) interpretations of the 
Torah.  These texts were primarily written in Hebrew (and to a lesser extent Aramaic as with the later books 
such as Daniel and Ezra) and were the last works to be incorporated into the Jewish canon as the Ketuvim 
(Writings) between the 1st century BCE to the second century CE.  This is the so-called Wisdom tradition that 
has Jewish roots but is essentially adopted and incorporated into the Christian tradition albeit transformed 
theologically and otherwise into the doctrine of the Trinity and the deification of Jesus.  
The second parallel track of the Hellenization of Jewish theology takes place primarily in Alexandria and starts 
with the commissioning of the translation of the Old Testament from the Hebrew into Greek proper, a work 
commissioned by the Ptolemaic Dynasty that takes place starting in the 2nd century BCE supposedly by 
seventy Jewish scholars - hence the name given to the work, i.e. the Septuagint, or simply LXX).  The lasting 
import of this translation cannot be over stated as it represents not just the beginning of the direct 
availability of Jewish history and theology in the Hellenic world but also the beginning of the interpretation of 
Jewish theology into the more modern and widely accepted Greek philosophical framework which had 
evolved independent of the Semitic/Hebrew culture for at least a thousand years.  It is from the tradition of 
the LXX that not only the influential pseudo-Christian theologian Philo Judaeus comes from, but also from 
which the New Testament and its interpretation of the life and teachings of Jesus are crafted and squarely 
rest.  
The LXX categorized a good portion of what were later to be incorporated into the Ketuvim as the "Wisdom 
Books", a categorization stemming primarily due to the significant Hellenic philosophic influence that is 
displayed that marks a departure from earlier Jewish canon, characterized primarily with the role that 
Wisdom (the Greek σοφία or sophia) plays as one of the defining features of Jewish history and theology.  
The books of Job, Psalms, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, and the Song of Songs which are all part of the Ketuvim fall 
into this Wisdom literature category, along with the Sirach and Book of Wisdom which were included in the 
LXX and therefor in almost all Christian Old Testament literature, but are not included in the Jewish Old 
Testament, i.e. the Tanakh.   
A good description of this Wisdom tradition within the Jewish historical and theological narrative can be 
found from the online Jewish encyclopedia:

In the main, wisdom was greatly valued and eagerly sought during the Second Temple, and the wise became 
the teachers of the young and the models of the old.  An extensive Wisdom-literature, of which large portions 
may have been lost, sprang up in continuation of the Proverbs of Solomon. Ecclesiasticus (Sirach) proves, on 
analysis, to be a compilation of writings which belong in part to an older generation; and the Testaments of the 
Twelve Patriarchs, which recent research has reclaimed for Jewish literature, may also be classed among these 
Wisdom-books. 
...
In all these books wisdom is extolled and invested with divine attributes (Ecclus. [Sirach] i. 1-26, iv. 11-29, li. 13-
30, and especially xxiv. 1-29, where it is identified with the law of Moses; Test. Patr., Levi, 13; Enoch, xlii. 1-2).  
The book on Astronomy and cosmography in the writings of Enoch is described as celestial wisdom (Enoch, 
xxxvii. 2, xlix. 1-3, lxxxii. 2-3; comp. Book of Jubilees, iv. 17, xxi. 10), and Noah's book on healing (Book of 
Jubilees, x. 13) belongs to the same class.
...
Under the influence of Greek philosophy wisdom became a divine agency of a personal character (Wisdom vii. 
22-30), so that Philo terms it the daughter of God, "the mother of the creative Word" ("De Profugis," §§ 9, 20), 
while as the creative principle of the world, wisdom occurs in Targ. Yer. to Gen. i. 1 (comp. Ḥag. 11b; Gen. R. i., 
where the Torah takes the place of wisdom; see also the midrash on Prov. iii. 19 in Jellinek, "B. H." ii. 23-39, v. 
63-69).  In Christian and Gentile Gnosticism, wisdom became the center of speculation (see Gnosticism).  The so-
called Fourth Book of Maccabees, a philosophical sermon on self-control with reference to the seven martyred 
sons of the Maccabean heroine, is another contribution to the Hellenic Wisdom-literature. 

This Wisdom tradition, which again has its roots in Jewish philosophy, represents at a very basic level a 
synthesis of Hellenic philosophical thought and Judaism, with some strong connections that can be drawn, 
particularly with the Book of Wisdom or the Wisdom of Solomon and Isis, the ancient Egyptian Goddess that 
was associated with the throne and royalty, eternal life and salvation, light and order - Ma'at to the 
Egyptians, kosmos and/or Nómos to the Greeks and the Torah of the Jews - all characteristics that are 
attributed to wisdom in Old Testament scripture, again particularly in the Book of Wisdom which is a fairly 
late (1st century CE) work .  Although at first glance this slight shift in emphasis in the interpretation and 
analysis of Torah into an albeit simplified pseudo-Hellenic philosophic framework might seem 
inconsequential, it marks the beginning not only of a new phase of Jewish exegesis, but also establishes the 
philosophical framework from which Christianity  in all its forms is constructed, Gnosticism included.
This salvation attribute to sophia, which runs as a consistent theme in Jewish Old Testament commentaries 
and interpretations of the Second Temple Period as Yahweh personified as sophia is looked upon as the 
savior of the Jews, along with her association with light, order and the Sun, is to gain significant traction in 
the Gnostic tradition that takes root after the death of Jesus and his life and teachings are adopted and 
interpreted by various schools and sects throughout the Mediterranean, particularly in Alexandria which is 
the source of many of the Gnostic sects which are prevalent in the first few centuries after Jesus is crucified 
and before Christian orthodoxy takes shape.  
All of the "Jewish" literature that is extant from this period - from the Wisdom Books that come down to us 
as part of the Old Testament literature which personify wisdom as the agent of salvation, order and 
knowledge to the Jews, to the work of Philo Judaeus the philosopher and theologian who applied a classically 
Hellenic philosophic lens to Old Testament interpretation, to Josephus the Jewish historian who interpreted 
the Jewish tradition from an historical perspective for the Greeks and Romans during the first century CE  - 
established the theological and intellectual foundations, set the stage as it were, for the interpretation of the 
life and teachings of Jesus of Nazareth, and provided the theological and historical foundations of 
Christianity.  A "religious" and theological movement, ironically enough, which diverged significantly from the 
prevalence of truth and order as prime metaphysical and philosophical building blocks as had been so well 
established by the Greeks (and to a lesser extent Jews), to the rise in prevalence of the role of salvation and 
eternal life, through Christ, as the core tenets of faith. 
 
 
Figure 31: Hellenic Theo-Philosophical Development in Antiquity
Early Christian Theology: Jesus, Gnosis, and Logos

With the Hellenic philosophic tradition and culture firmly planted in the Mediterranean in the last few 
centuries BCE and the first century CE, we see a drastic shift in theological and philosophical thought as 
sages, mystics and philosophers alike try to make sense of the larger than life figure and story that comes to 
be associated with Jesus of Nazareth.  In the first few centuries after his death we have several different 
streams of thought that crop up as a reaction to, and in order to try and interpret, his life and teachings 
within the context of prevailing theological, religious and philosophical views.  Although it's not easy to box 
these different streams of thought into just a few categories - each school or sect had their own unique take 
and interpretation - it is convenient for the purposes of our discussion to draw the line between three 
categories of schools of thought, all of which took different approaches in integrating and interpreting the life 
and teachings of Christ into their own respective belief systems and teachings - namely Gnosticism and 
Christianity, both of which view Jesus as a great prophet and savior but who differed significantly on how he 
fit into the rest of the cosmological order and how to fit him into the Jewish tradition which preceded him, 
and then on the Greek philosophical front Neo-Platonism which takes the torch from the rest of the Greek 
philosophical schools after Christianity takes root and although doesn't recognize Jesus as a prophet or savior 
in any way, still evolves parallel to Christianity and influences Christianity's theological development to a 
large extent.  
All of these streams of theo-philosophical development show marked Hellenic philosophical influence and 
the surviving works from these traditions were almost entirely transcribed in Greek, speaking to the 
continuous and altogether "Greek" intellectual tradition to which they are undoubtedly an integral part.  In 
the case of the Christian and Gnostic traditions specifically, as the evolved in the first few centuries after 
Jesus is crucified, they look to establish the credibility and truth of Christ and place him within the prevailing 
theology of the time.  The early Christian theologians and apologists leveraged the Hebrew tradition and the 
lineage of Moses for this purpose of course , while the Gnostics looked to a more esoteric and mystical 
bent regarding the interpretation of Jesus as the manifestation of the divine and through which knowledge 
and truth in and of themselves could be "seen", borrowing in many respects the most esoteric and mystical 
elements of the Hellenic philosophical tradition, much of which was to be found in the Platonic school.  While 
the Gnostics influenced early Christian theology, remnants of which can be found in the Gospel of John for 
example, its tenets were ultimately rejected by the Church.  
In parallel to these "Christian" theo-philosophical schools, to use a more broad sense of the term and one 
which includes the early Christian doctrines and streams of thought that were eventually regarded as heresy 
by the Church as it is established and refined in the 3rd, 4th and 5th centuries CE, we have a renaissance of 
sorts of Platonic thought that is classically referred to as "Neo-Platonism", a philosophical tradition which 
more or less viewed the philosophies of Aristotle and Plato, as well as the Hellenic philosophical tradition 
more broadly, to reflect a cohesive whole rather than as competing, or contradictory, schools of thought.
The Neo-Platonists supposedly relied on the unwritten teachings of Plato as the basis for this more inclusive 
philosophic view.  These teachings, as the tradition holds, were orally transmitted from Plato himself directly 
to his students and followers, and to some extent at least conveyed subtly different views and beliefs that 
diverged from the standard, public (and written) teachings of Plato as reflected in his dialogues that were 
widely disseminated in antiquity.  The Neo-Platonic tradition very much evolved alongside of, and was 
influenced by, early Christianity, representing the last ditch effort as it were to defend the Hellenic theo-
philosophical tradition from the onslaught and spread of orthodox monotheism, as manifest first with 
Christianity of course and then morphing into its Arabic cousin Islam.  The tradition also incorporated some of 
the ancient threads of mysticism and esotericism into their teachings and practices as well.
Neo-Platonism as a theo-philosophical tradition is perhaps best known in the end not only for their mystical 
bent, but also for their doctrine of universal emanation from the One, or the Good, a metaphysical principle 
which plays a large part in the creation narrative of Plato's Timaeus, the metaphysical equivalent of the form 
of forms that manifests itself in the world via the Divine Intellect, or Nous, roughly equivalent to the role 
played by Plato's Demiurge which is the anthropomorphic principle that produces the "World Soul" in the 
Timaeus.  
The theo-philosophical Logos for example, was not in any way a Christian invention, the principle having a 
long history in the Hellenic theo-philosophical tradition going back to not just Philo Judaeus, but even as far 
back into the classical Hellenic philosophical period with the Stoics, where Logos was not only an important 
theological, metaphysical and cosmological ordering principle, but a basic and fundamental characteristic of 
philosophy in and of itself as a rational discipline.  This fundamentally Hellenic theo-philosophical principle 
then, i.e. Logos, morphs into this concept of the Divine Intellect in the Neo-Platonic theo-philosophical 
tradition, i.e. Nous, providing the metaphysical bridge, and basic (animated or spiritual) universal ordering 
principle, between the Creator, the Demiurge or God, and his creation - the Platonic World Soul which 
roughly corresponds to the Christian Holy Spirit.
It is fairly well established that these ideas, Hellenic philosophy in general and in particular Neo-Platonic 
thought, heavily influenced not only Christian theology, but also its underlying metaphysics as well.  In fact 
many scholars believe, and there is certainly is a strong case to be made given the intellectual, metaphysical 
and theological similarities, that the notion of the Trinity - as the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit of course 
- was not so much a unique contribution of the early Christians so much as a borrowed and refurbished 
fundamentally Hellenic, Neo-Platonic  theological and metaphysical construct.  
The most influential of the "Neo-Platonists" were Plotinus (204 - 270 CE), his student Porphyry (234 - 305 
CE), and perhaps most prominently Proclus (412 - 485 CE).  While Neo-Platonism as a school of thought was 
not necessarily "anti-Christian", it was branded "pagan" by the Church, and after Plotinus the center of 
gravity for what we consider "Greek" philosophy shifted eastward to the Arab world, subsequently picked up 
after the advent and proliferation of Islam by the so-called falṣafa, the name adopted by the Muslim 
philosophers that, in Arabic translation, also looked upon the Hellenic philosophical tradition as more of an 
integral whole rather than competing schools. 

Although it's easy to criticize the standard orthodox interpretation and canonization of the early Christian 
Church Fathers, when looking at the extant schools and teachings and books that were prevalent in the first 
few centuries after Christ one can certainly see why the Gnostic doctrines, with their emphasis on direct 
knowledge and realization, i.e. gnosis or "knowledge" (from the Greek verb "to know"), represented a threat 
of sorts to what eventually became the more orthodox interpretation of Christianity which focused on the 
saving grace of Christ and the more literal interpretation as it were of the "Word" of God.  This tradition 
emphasized not only his crucifixion and resurrection as not just proof of the immortality of the Soul but also 
as the sole means by which individuals could be "saved".  
As part of this theological stance which developed in the first few centuries after the death of Christ, the 
Gnostic and other "pagan" philosophical schools and traditions were rejected and a specific set of texts and 
books which reflected this belief system around Christ the savior of mankind were ultimately established into 
what today is the canonical version of the Bible.  This text of course includes the Pentateuch, or the Five 
Books of Moses along with other selected Old Testament books, along with the selected New Testament 
books of which the Four Gospels - Matthew, Mark, Luke and John - represent the heart.  Parallel to the 
creation of the "Christian Canon" as it were, a standard interpretation of these texts, i.e. Christian orthodox 
theology, developed and was established as well, all evolving alongside the establishment and flourishing of 
the Church itself.  The doctrine espoused by the early Church, as all of the pagan centers of worship and 
schools were effectively banned, persecuted and outlawed (ironically just as the early Christian schools were) 
centered around the doctrine of the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit and their union in concept - what 
was established as the principle of homoousios or hypostasis by the early Christian Church Fathers which 
denotes the unity of the Trinity in substance or persona.
The Christian orthodox view on the interpretation of Christ and his relationship to the Father and the Holy 
Spirit, the three pillars of orthodox Christian faith, was first established in the First Council of Nicaea (325 CE), 
which set out among other things to establish the Church's position on the precise theological relationship 
between God the Father and his Son, Christ and the Holy Spirit, the three different aspects of the Trinity 
which were different aspects of the one true God.  In so doing, these early Christian theologians not only 
established the orthodox Christian canon, but also outlined quite specifically the accepted theological 
boundaries of the orthodox Christian faith, establishing in no uncertain terms which pre-existing "Christian" 
schools of thought and doctrines were to be considered heretical which of course included the Gnostic 
schools among others.  
The Nicene Creed of 325 convened due in no small measure to what modern historians refer to as the "Arian 
controversy", which was plaguing and dividing the early Church at the time and was concerned about how 
the three main spiritual aspects of God - again God the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit - were to be 
interpreted within the context of the monotheistic theology which was of course also a hallmark of early 
Christian thought.  The question was essentially how were God the Father, Jesus the Son, and the Holy Spirit 
- all main themes and aspects of divinity that were spoken of quite clearly not just in the Gospels but 
permeated the rest of the core Christian books, were to be viewed in relationship to each other.  Were they 
one and the same substance?  Just different names of the same things?  Different aspects of the same 
principal?  Or were they fundamentally different aspects of different ontological significance?  
Although this may seem like splitting hairs to the present day scholar or student of religion, or to someone 
who is interested in the development of early Christianity simply from an academic perspective, to the 
authorities of the then nascent and early forming Church, these were absolutely critical issues to its survival.  
If they could not agree on how to interpret the message of Christ, could not agree on which texts should be 
considered orthodox and standard and which were not, the very survival of the Church was in jeopardy.  They 
needed not just a single set of works and books that were to be used and disseminated by the Church, but 
also a consistent - and coherent - message and interpretation of the texts which centered around Jesus of 
course in order to consolidate and establish the authority and power of the Church as the proprietor as it 
were of the message of Christ and the means by which "Christians" were to be saved.  These motivating 
factors of the early Church must be kept in mind when looking at the history of the development of the early 
canon of the Bible and its associated theology, the Nicene Creed being a perfect example of this.
Despite hundreds of years of philosophical thought that preceded the rise of Christianity, and even with 
several centuries of interpretation of Jewish philosophy within the light of prevailing Greek philosophical 
views, i.e. the so-called Wisdom tradition which did have a clear role and place for prophets and sages, there 
existed no theological framework for the existence of a man who was theologically equivalent to God, calling 
into question mortality in and of itself and the "oneness" or unity of God which had been clearly established 
metaphysically for some time in the Greek philosophic tradition.  The metaphysical framework simply did not 
exist, and arguably one of the biggest challenges of the early Church was to figure out how to bridge this gap 
theologically while still holding true to the Greek philosophical movement which had become widely 
accepted as the intellectual benchmark for any theological system. 
The Nicene Creed itself which was established in 325 was enhanced and modified somewhat in the First 
Council of Constantinople in 381, and in this credo we have the precise form of the doctrine of the Trinity 
which survives down to Christian liturgy even to this day and essentially defines orthodox Christianity.  
Although there are different variants, as they all exist in English translation since the creeds themselves were 
defined in Greek, Latin and Armenian, we have the English version below that was adopted by the Episcopal 
Church in 1973 and which retains all of the main, salient features of the creed as it was established some 
1700 years ago:

We believe in one God, the Father, the Almighty, maker of heaven and earth, of all that is, seen and unseen.

We believe in one Lord, Jesus Christ, the only Son of God, eternally begotten of the Father, God from God, Light 
from Light, true God from true God, begotten, not made, of one Being with the Father.  Through him all things 
were made.  For us and for our salvation he came down from heaven: by the power of the Holy Spirit he 
became incarnate from the Virgin Mary, and was made man. 

For our sake he was crucified under Pontius Pilate; he suffered death and was buried.  On the third day he rose 
again in accordance with the Scriptures; he ascended into heaven and is seated at the right hand of the Father.  
He will come again in glory to judge the living and the dead, and his kingdom will have no end.

We believe in the Holy Spirit, the Lord, the giver of life, who proceeds from the Father and the Son.  With the 
Father and the Son he is worshiped and glorified.  He has spoken through the Prophets. 

We believe in one holy catholic and apostolic Church.  We acknowledge one baptism for the forgiveness of sins.  
We look for the resurrection of the dead, and the life of the world to come.  Amen. 

That's it in a nutshell, the Christian faith and doctrine as it stands even to this day.  And one can see why it 
was necessary for the early Christian Church Fathers, or at least why they felt compelled, to establish and 
outline the creed of Christianity so explicitly - they wanted to stop the fractions in the early Christian Church 
which were threatening to dissipate and at worst destabilize the early Church itself, one that had taken 
centuries to establish and had done so at the threat of death and persecution by most of the early Christians, 
many of whom had been ostracized and even killed for professing their faith.
Leaving aside the semantic debate as to the words chosen for the Creed as it become established and the 
underlying theological debates which were to a large extent put to bed so to speak with the establishment of 
the Creed, what is worth considering and looking at the non-standard early Christian traditions, which fall 
loosely under the umbrella as Gnosticism, as well as what characters and teachers played a role in the 
shaping of the standard orthodox interpretation of Christ which ended up being encapsulated in this Creed 
which forms the theological foundation for Christianity even to this day.   
Because although we gain consensus in the Christian theological family by adoption of the Creed, we do lose 
a sense of individual expression, of the notion of direct perception and knowledge of the divine - i.e. gnosis - 
which rested at the heart of the Gnostic traditions which were prominent in the first few centuries after Jesus 
died, and which stemmed in no small measure from the Greek mystery cults which still remained somewhat 
popular throughout the Mediterranean until they were first persecuted during the latter part of the reign of 
Constantine the Great (Roman Emperor from 306 to 337 CE) and then outlawed explicitly during the reign 
Constantine's son Constantius II (Roman Emperor from 337 to 361).  Nothing is gained without something 
being lost and that is certainly the case in the consolidation of the theological creed of orthodox early 
Christianity, a theological movement which rose on the backs of the persecution of its brethren and 
competing theological traditions, many of whom had lineages that went back deep into antiquity.

Let's start our review of how orthodox Christianity came about, which in turn drove the formation of this 
Creed which defines the Christian orthodox theological position for the most part, by looking at the 
development of some of the early Christian Church Fathers , and by doing so we can see what the 
competing schools and interpretations of the life and times of the great prophet Jesus of Nazareth looked like 
and why the various schools disagreed on the points they did, and what forces drove the consolidation of the 
belief systems into orthodox Christianity and in turn the suppression and altogether destruction of the 
competing outlooks and philosophic disciplines and schools. 
The main figures of this early (orthodox) Christianity are Justin Martyr (c. 100 - 165 CE), Clement of 
Alexandria (c. 150 - 215 CE), his student Origen also of Alexandria (Origen of Alexandria)  (c. 185 - 254 CE) 
and then of course St. Augustine, or Augustine of Hippo (354 - 430 CE) whose most important works City of 
God and Confessions have come to be regarded as some of the standard classic literature of (Western) 
Christian doctrine.  The teachings of these great early Christian theologians and believers can be contrasted 
with the various "Gnostic" sects which were also very popular at the time, most notably the school started by 
Valentinus (c. 100 - 160 CE) who studied in Alexandria but started his school and teaching in Rome toward 
the latter part of his life, the Christian Gnostic Basilides who taught and flourished in the first half of the 
second century CE also in Alexandria, and even the sect of Manichaeism founded by Mani (216-276 CE) which 
was a main rival to Christianity to the East and synthesized elements of Jewish Christianity, along with 
Zoroastrianism, Buddhism and even to some extent the Near Eastern mystical sect of Mithraism.
What we do know about the first few centuries after Christ was killed by the Romans (the Jewish authorities 
in Palestine of course playing no small part in the process) was that the overall flavor and theme from a 
philosophical and theological perspective was one of great diversity and synthesis, an enlightenment era of 
philosophy and mysticism as it were, with much of the intellectual innovation occurring not surprisingly in 
Alexandria in Egypt which at the time was the center of learning, scholarship and tolerance in antiquity 
certainly through the first few centuries CE until paganism and alternative Christian theological 
interpretations (Gnosticism) becomes outlawed and outright persecuted into extinction.
While it doesn't necessarily reflect the true diversity and depth of the various schools of thought which took 
root during this time of theological and philosophical flourishing, a simplifying categorization of the schools of 
belief that were prevalent during this era - leaving aside Manichaeism which can be viewed as falling outside 
these three (simplifying) categories - could be broken out as follows:

*	Orthodox Christianity: resting on the Four Canonical Gospels (Mathew, Mark, Luke and John) and the 
writings and letters of the Apostle Paul (aka St. Paul), who although not one of the 12 disciples of 
Jesus was certainly the most influential in spreading his message after his passing and most certainly 
the most influential to the development of orthodox Christianity.  

*	The Gnostic tradition which was a synthesis of not only Jewish Wisdom literature and its unique 
sophia/Isis view of Old Testament exegesis but also the incorporation of some the predominant 
astronomical and cosmological Greek philosophical themes (most notably the incorporation of the 
notion of the seven celestial spheres and the synthesis of both sophia and Christ within this 
cosmological framework)

*	Neo-Platonism which continued the Platonic (and Peripatetic) philosophical tradition but at the time 
had incorporated Stoic elements as well also began to evolve in parallel to orthodox Christianity in its 
adoption of the Trinity which of course bears striking resemblance to the Neo-Platonic triad of the 
One, the Intellect and the Soul which is manifest in the teachings of Plotinus and Proclus most clearly.
The New Testament canon as we know it today, consisting of the Four Gospels, Acts of the Apostles, letters of 
the Apostles and Revelation was formalized in the Second Council in Trullo, also known as the Quinisext or 
"Fifth-Sixth" Council, in 692 CE during the reign of the Roman Emperor Justinian II.  The Council was held in 
Constantinople with some 300 Bishops from both the Eastern and Western Roman/Byzantine Empire with 
the intent of establishing a more consistent approach not only in the interpretation of the Bible itself, but 
also in the practices and teachings of all of the Churches throughout the empire, with the intent of crafting a 
more consistent message and to (re) establish the orthodox Biblical, i.e. New Testament, canon.
The heart of the New Testament canon is of course the Gospels, so named because they relay the good news 
(from the old English "god-spell" meaning "good news" or "glad tidings") of the coming of the messiah and 
the saving of mankind, the core belief of the Christian faith.  In the Gospels, which were four of many Gospel 
like texts that were in circulation after the death of Jesus, we find four separate but very similar accounts of 
the life and teachings of Jesus's ministry, which incidentally only reflects the last three years of his life and as 
well know includes not only his ministry, but also the story of his death and resurrection.
Although the date and authorship of these Gospels is disputed, it is general agreed by academics and Biblical 
scholars that these books were written sometime in the first century CE somewhere between 20 and 50 
years after Jesus's death, that there were in all likelihood not written by direct disciples of Jesus, and that at 
least three of the Gospels - Matthew, Mark and Luke which are collectively referred to sometimes and the 
"synoptic" Gospels, given their similarities in all likelihood share a common, earlier source that has been code 
named "Q" by modern Biblical historians.  
Q as it turns out is believed to have a close relationship with the Gnostic Gospel of Thomas, a book of sayings 
attributed to Jesus which was discovered as part of the Gnostic archive in the Nag Hammadi Library of 
Gnostic texts, a text which consistent with most of the other Gnostic literature does not focus on the events 
of Jesus's life, nor his resurrection, but more so on what he said and what he taught, hence the Gnostic 
(Greek gnosis or knowledge) classification.   The Gospel According to John also bears some classically Hellenic 
philosophic and Gnostic elements, showing particular strains of Philo Judaeus's doctrine of Logos illustrating 
that this text at least stemmed from perhaps an alternate early Christian theological tradition, one which the 
Hellenic philosophical schools, or at least the teachings of Philo Judaeus and his successors Origen and 
Clement played a more predominant role.
The next heart of New Testament canon which was established in the early Church are the Books attributed 
to the apostle Paul.  St. Paul is one of the most prominent and influential figures in the history of Christianity 
and although not one of the twelve direct disciples of Jesus, he is considered by most academics and 
historians to be an apostle/student of Jesus proper and his efforts and accomplishments in founding the 
Christian faith, as reflected in the Pauline Epistles, or Epistles of Paul, which represent thirteen (or fourteen 
depending upon which version of the canon) books out of the twenty-seven books in the New Testament.  
The Epistles of Paul give us great insight into not only how the early Church and Jesus's message took root in 
the decades following his crucifixion, but also, along with the canonical Gospels, the general tenets of the 
faith (presumably) as taught by Jesus himself.  It is no wonder that these books were included as part of the 
official canon. 

One of the first early Christian apologists was Justin Martyr, also known as Saint Justin (c. 100 - 165 CE), who 
was born in Judea is known for being one of the foremost interpreters of the Logos doctrine in early 
Christianity, the very same Logos that played such a prominent theological and philosophical role in the Old 
Testament exegesis by Philo Judaeus.  Of Justin's extant work perhaps the most influential is the First 
Apology, a work which defends the reality and truth of the Christian faith and attempts to convince the 
Roman Emperor at the time, Antonius, to stop his persecution of early Christians.  His reliance on the 
principle of Logos as the principle by which God acts and creates in the manifest and material world, a pre-
existing force from which Christ comes forth (see John 1), is his means of establishing the connection to, and 
ultimate synthesis of, Christ and the Greek philosophers which preceded him, concluding that some Greek 
philosophers, most notably Socrates and Plato, were in fact unknowing Christians, just as Philo Judaeus 
considered the early Greek philosophers to be a continuation and synthesis of the philosophical doctrines 
and teachings of Moses.
In his other extant work Dialogue with Trypho, Justin attempts to show in classically Greek dialogue form 
between himself as a recently converted Christian, and Trypho a Jewish rabbi, that Christianity is the new law 
for all mankind and that Jesus is in fact the Jewish messiah.  In the beginning of this work Justin relates his 
(failed) search for knowledge of God amongst the Stoics, Pythagoreans and Peripatetics, and although he 
found solace and insight in the teachings of Plato in his exposition of the one and true God head, he later 
became much more drawn to the teachings of the Jewish scripture in light of its consummation and 
manifestation in the life of Christ to whom he attributed the greatest source of truth and knowledge of God, 
and which of course was the source of his own conversion to Christianity despite his Greek philosophical 
education and exposure.
From his Dialogue with Trypho, we can see his identification of Jesus with the classic Hellenic philosophic 
Logos, consistent with the tradition that had been laid down by Philo Judaeus before him:

I shall give you another testimony, my friends," said I, "from the Scriptures, that God begat before all creatures 
a Beginning, [who was] a certain rational power [proceeding] from Himself, who is called by the Holy Spirit, 
now the Glory of the Lord, now the Son, again Wisdom, again an Angel, then God, and then Lord and Logos; 
and on another occasion He calls Himself Captain, when He appeared in human form to Joshua the son of Nave 
(Nun).  For He can be called by all those names, since He ministers to the Father's will, and since He was 
begotten of the Father by an act of will; just as we see happening among ourselves: for when we give out some 
word, we beget the word; yet not by abscission, so as to lessen the word [Logos] [which remains] in us, when 
we give it out: and just as we see also happening in the case of a fire, which is not lessened when it has kindled 
[another], but remains the same; and that which has been kindled by it likewise appears to exist by itself, not 
diminishing that from which it was kindled. 

The Word of Wisdom, who is Himself this God begotten of the Father of all things, and Word [Logos], and 
Wisdom [sophia], and Power, and the Glory of the Begetter, will bear evidence to me, when He speaks by 
Solomon the following: If I shall declare to you what happens daily, I shall call to mind events from everlasting, 
and review them.  The Lord made me the beginning of His ways for His works.  From everlasting He established 
me in the beginning, before He had made the earth, and before He had made the deeps, before the springs of 
the waters had issued forth, before the mountains had been established.  Before all the hills He begets me.  God 
made the country, and the desert, and the highest inhabited places under the sky.  When He made ready the 
heavens, I was along with Him, and when He set up His throne on the winds: when He made the high clouds 
strong, and the springs of the deep safe, when He made the foundations of the earth, I was with Him arranging.  
I was that in which He rejoiced; daily and at all times I delighted in His countenance, because He delighted in 
the finishing of the habitable world, and delighted in the sons of men.. 

Here we see Justin looking not only to the scriptures themselves as the starting point from which true 
knowledge of God is to be ascertained, but also a metaphysical and theological equivalence is drawn 
between this "rational power" of God, i.e. Logos, which brings the world into existence, which establishes 
"order" from chaos as it were, and which emanates from, and yet at the same time is unified with the one 
true God of "scripture".  This Logos is described by Justin, as was also interpreted by the orthodox Christian 
tradition in the doctrine of the Trinity, as equivalent to not only Wisdom (sophia), but also with Jesus himself 
as the Son of God, as well as God himself, differing in name only, not in principle. 

In contrast to what we would consider the more orthodox interpretation of Jesus through the doctrine of 
Logos, and incorporating the Wisdom tradition of the Jews at the same time, we find another influential early 
Christian teacher who comes from the academic and intellectual milieu of Alexandria, namely Valentinus (c. 
100 - 160 CE), typically categorized as one of the early "Gnostics", a group of early Christian teachers and 
schools of thought which were much more esoteric and mystical in their interpretation and view of the 
meaning of Christ and his place in the cosmological world order than what came to be considered "orthodox" 
Christianity as viewed through the lens of the canonical Gospels that were incorporated into the New 
Testament.  
Although born and educated in Northern Egypt and Alexandria, Valentinus spends his most productive years 
teaching in Rome and at one point, according to Tertullian, was considered for the position of the Bishop of 
Rome but started his own group after he was passed over.  Although none of Valentinus's writings are extant, 
we know of the popularity of his school (Valentinianism) as well as many of its tenets and beliefs through 
some of the extant works of Clement of Alexandria, who writes that Valentinus was a follower of Theudas 
and that Theudas in turn was a follower of St. Paul, as well as from the early Christian theologian and 
apologist Irenaeus (c. early 2nd century - 202 CE) whose best known work, Against Heresies (c. 180), which 
defends "orthodox" Christianity against the various so-called heretic Gnostic schools that were prevalent at 
the time, with a special emphasis on the school started by Valentinus and the so-called Gospel of Truth which 
was attributed to him.  
In the words of the Irenaeus, we find the following description of Valentinus and his teachings, making 
explicit reference to the Gospel of Truth which is one of the core so-called "Gnostic" treatises from antiquity:

But the followers of Valentinus, putting away all fear, bring forward their own compositions and boast that 
they have more Gospels than really exist.  Indeed their audacity has gone so far that they entitle their recent 
composition the Gospel of Truth, though it agrees in nothing with the Gospels of the apostles, and so no Gospel 
of theirs is free from blasphemy.  For if what they produce is the Gospel of Truth, and is different from those the 
apostles handed down to us, those who care to can learn how it can be show from the Scriptures themselves 
that [then] what is handed down from the apostles is not the Gospel of Truth. 

The copy of the Gospel of Truth, which Irenaeus refers to explicitly in his Against Heresies and is attributed to 
the Valentinian School, was discovered in the Nag Hammadi Library collection in the second half of the 
twentieth century and is believed to have been authored in the middle of the second century CE, in Greek.  In 
this Gospel, the life and tribulations of Jesus are not called out specifically as they are in the four canonical 
Gospels, and instead there is a focus on the creation of the known universe in Error (in personified form), and 
the delivery of Jesus (a messiah) to the earth to show us eternal life in order to (re)establish the wisdom of 
gnosis, or knowledge, which in itself grants salvation.  
This salvation, this blessing of eternal rest, comes to those who have experienced gnosis, a transcendental 
state of awareness where the object of worship is merged entirely not only within the act of worship itself 
but also with worshipper as well.  The Gnostic tradition no doubt, for all intents and purposes reflects a deep 
esoteric and mystical teaching that was said to have come straight from the master (Jesus) himself - his 
"secret" teachings as it were.  This was the pinnacle state of Hellenic mystical schools, where the man once 
bound in the cave to perceive shadows, is released from his prison and shown the true divine realm which 
was illuminated by the Sun, of which the images in the Cave were but Shadows (Plato's Allegory of the Cave 
reference).  
The Gnostics were true mystics, but at the same time were faithful to the worship of Jesus in their own way, 
not in his physical form as having been born in the flesh and then crucified in the flesh by Pontius Pilot, but 
his message of immortality and the esoteric truths which he taught and personified.  To the Gnostics, Jesus of 
Nazareth was Logos personified, and in that sense he was not born, he was ever-present since the beginning 
of time.  
This idea of the dichotomy of God the Father and Jesus the Son, through which is the only means to salvation 
in the Christian tradition of course, is theologically speaking the most radical notion that we find in the 
Gospels which presumably accurately reflects the teachings of Jesus of Nazareth.  In fact this dichotomy not 
only separates or distinguishes the New Testament theology from the Old Testament doctrines, the split 
between the Jewish and Christian faiths as it were, but ironically, as we are told directly in the Gospels 
themselves, is the very reason why Jesus is put to death in the first place.   
But to the Gnostics, in contrast to the as of yet germinated orthodox interpretation of Jesus's life, with a 
focus on the life of the flesh, it was what Jesus taught was inside of all of us, our birthright in fact, if we could 
just merge ourselves into knowledge itself we could be saved here and now.  This was the blessed Gnostic, 
the knower of God, whose teachings are ultimately that the kingdom of God is within us all and no Church is 
required to determine our salvation.  The Gnostic philosophy shared some Platonic features as well to be 
sure, for it was the existence of the One, Being itself, that the Gnostic could truly know.  Logos however was 
still the key, the connecting force and principle that bound the eternal cosmos to the individual Soul, in 
whose image it was created and who was born in the flesh to show us the way.  
The metaphysics behind Gnosticism, despite being poorly documented given the mystical and esoteric nature 
of the movement and given that its teachers and doctrines were effectively obliterated from the earth by the 
early Church, or at the very least driven underground, nonetheless sit on, not surprisingly, the Hellenic 
philosophic tradition which preceded it which had incorporated mystic elements from the start.  But with 
Gnosticism, Plato's embedded mysticism was drawn out and put at the forefront of the message.  To the 
Gnostics, gnosis itself was the goal, a state of being or realization that could in fact be attained and which 
Jesus himself represented and died for.  This was Plato's Good, his Being, the Pythagorean Monad that could, 
upon constant contemplation and reflection, be fathomed and understood, and in so fathoming one could 
become co-existent with and merged into this One.  And in this state of gnosis, this embodiment of pure, 
unadulterated knowledge as it were, Plato's Indefinite Dyad, the world of Becoming, could be perceived for 
what it truly was, a manifestation of pure Being.  
To the Gnostics, Jesus was the personified Logos, his life and teachings illustrative of the potential for gnosis 
in all of us.  Plato's Forms and Ideas, whose penultimate source and final end was the Good, represented the 
metaphysical framework within which the Sun of gnosis, which shone outside of the Cave of delusion, the 
world of Shadows.

That is the gospel of him whom they seek, which he has revealed to the perfect through the mercies of the 
Father as the hidden mystery, Jesus the Christ.  Through him he enlightened those who were in darkness 
because of forgetfulness.  He enlightened them and gave them a path.  And that path is the truth which he 
taught them.  For this reason error was angry with him, so it persecuted him.  It was distressed by him, so it 
made him powerless.  He was nailed to a cross.  He became a fruit of the knowledge of the Father.  He did not, 
however, destroy them because they ate of it.  He rather caused those who ate of it to be joyful because of this 
discovery. 

This extant passage from the Gospel of Truth illustrates the esoteric nature of the Gnostic tradition which 
took a much more metaphorical and mystical approach to the comprehension of the Passion of Christ.  The 
Gnostic tradition embraced the persecution and crucifixion of Christ as a reflection of an element of 
imperfection that exists in the material universe, but through a proper understanding could be "overcome".  
Jesus was a manifestation of the eternal Logos in the flesh and in coming into being through the will of God 
the Father illustrated the truth of the Old Testament scripture but at the same time showed that gnosis as a 
state of being, in a Platonic sense, was just as real as Jesus himself.
Part of the Gnostic interpretation of Christ which was rejected by Christian orthodoxy was this view that he 
was the consort of Sophia, the goddess of wisdom who was reflected in the Wisdom tradition embedded in 
the Old Testament, e.g. in the Wisdom of Solomon or Book of Wisdom which in turn had come to be 
associated with Isis, the savior and goddess of knowledge from Egypt.   It was within this Wisdom tradition, 
along with the vengeful God of the Jews that we find throughout the Old Testament in fact, that the Gnostic 
schools attempted to reconcile in a way that was distinct from, and therefore was ultimately rejected by, the 
orthodox Christian doctrine that came to be known as the Trinity.  The Gnostics looked upon Yahweh, who 
was equated with Plato's Demiurge in some sense, as a great deity who although believed he had mastered 
and created the whole universe, but in fact there was another layer of heavens and gods above him, from 
which sophia and Christ as the eternal Logos emerge, and in their emergence rectify and balance the "erred" 
and flawed condition of the imperfect state of man.  
Sophia and Christ as her consort is the mythological narrative upon which the explanation of the meaning of 
Christ and his crucifixion is framed.  Logos, the ordering principle of the universe which was an aspect of God 
himself, God the Father, is sent down to the world of man to bring about a new age of spiritual 
enlightenment and unify the old-world gods with the one and only god the Father which Jesus taught and 
embodied.  Their conception of Jesus as the "Word" in the flesh was as the theological bridge between world 
of men and the world of God which had been ripped asunder since mankind was cast out of the Garden.  
Through his message, the truth of gnosis, which was explained within the context of this intermixed and 
synthesized mythological narrative, brings the spiritual world into balance as it were, bringing together the 
Wisdom tradition of the Old Testament, Platonic theology, along with ancient mythos as reflected in the 
tradition surrounding Isis, i.e. Sophia, in her goddess form. 

Another of the Gnostic classified teachers and schools from this early "Christian" period, also from 
Alexandria, was Basilides.  Basilides flourished from approximately 117 to 138 CE and was a contemporary of 
Valentinus whose teachings he must have been exposed to at least some extent, and Justin Martyr whose life 
was spent further to the East somewhat outside of Alexandrian influence.  Basilides claimed to have inherited 
his teachings directly from the apostle Matthew and is known to have been one of the first commentators on 
the Gospels in a work entitled Exegetica.  Although this work is extant only in fragments and quotations, from 
detractors unfortunately, he is also known for having developed a cosmogony and world order that differed 
quite significantly, at least according to Irenaeus, from the majority of the other "Gnostic" traditions.  His 
teachings must have been popular however for it is said that his followers, known as Basilidians, persisted for 
at least two centuries after his death in Alexandria.  
It's worth quoting a passage from the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy which speaks to his life and 
teachings directly in the entry on Gnosticism, drawing primarily on Irenaeus's Against Heresies as the primary 
source: 

The Christian philosopher Basilides of Alexandria (fl. 132-135 CE) developed a cosmogony and cosmogony quite 
distinct from the sophia myth of classical Gnosticism, and also reinterpreted key Christian concepts by way of 
the popular Stoic philosophy of the era.  Basilides began his system with a "primal octet" consisting of the 
"unengendered parent" or Father; Intellect (nous); the "ordering principle" or "Word" (logos); "prudence" 
(phronêsis); Wisdom (sophia); Power (dunamis) (Irenaeus, Against Heresies 1.24.3, in Layton, The Gnostic 
Scriptures 1987) and "justice" and "peace" (Basilides, Fragment A, Layton). 

Through the union of Wisdom and Power, a group of angelic rulers came into existence, and from these rulers a 
total of 365 heavens or aeons were generated (Irenaeus 1.24.3).  Each heaven had its own chief ruler (arkhôn), 
and numerous lesser angels.  The final heaven, which Basilides claimed is the realm of matter in which we all 
dwell, was said by him to be ruled by "the god of the Jews," who favored the Jewish nation over all others, and 
so caused all manner of strife for the nations that came into contact with them-as well as for the Jewish 
people themselves.  This behavior caused the rulers of the other 364 heavens to oppose the god of the Jews, 
and to send a savior, Jesus Christ, from the highest realm of the Father, to rescue the human beings who are 
struggling under the yoke of this jealous god (Irenaeus 1.24.4).  

Since the realm of matter is the sole provenance of this spiteful god, Basilides finds nothing of value in it, and 
states that "salvation belongs only to the soul; the body is by nature corruptible" (Irenaeus 1.24.5).  He even 
goes so far as to declare, contra Christian orthodoxy, that Christ's death on the cross was only apparent, and 
did not actually occur "in the flesh" (Irenaeus 1.24.4)-this doctrine came to be called docetism. 

So in the teachings and doctrine of Basilides we see clear "Gnostic" elements in Jesus as the personified 
Logos being manifest to bridge the theological gap as it were between the wrathful God of the Old Testament 
and the benevolent God the Father as taught and personified by Jesus himself.  We also find this synthesis of 
all of the different metaphysical and theological elements which were characteristic of Hellenic philosophy 
integrated into a wholly unique and distinct cosmogony and world order as it were, another marked 
characteristic of the Gnostics.  
Further insights into the Gnostic tradition can be gleaned from The Gospel of Thomas, one of the other great 
finds in the Nag Hammadi Library collection of scrolls that was not included in the Bible and contains what 
are thought to be quite early sayings and teachings of Christ.  Much of the material can actually be found in 
the canonical Gospels themselves pointing to either a common source of all of the material - the Four 
canonical Gospels and the Gospel of Thomas - to perhaps an earlier origin of the Gospel of Thomas work, or 
to the existence of an even earlier source from which all the Gospels stem from, a source given the code 
name "Q" by modern scholars from which they theorize that both the Gospel of Thomas and the synoptic 
Gospels drew on heavily.  The latter view is probably the most dominant one amongst early Biblical scholars, 
that is the existence of an earlier source Q from which all these Gospels drew, but it is also believed that 
perhaps the Gospel of Thomas had ties with Syria where sentiment for Thomas was strong.  
The Gospel of Thomas itself is composed of 114 sayings which are attributed to Jesus, almost half of which 
strongly resemble similar passages in the canonical Gospels, the others being of perhaps more Gnostic origin 
as they are not found in any of the canonical Gospels.  In all likelihood however, it does appear that the 
Gospel of Thomas, although categorized as Gnostic given its exclusion from standard biblical canon and its 
existence in the Nag Hammadi Library texts which at some level define what we now refer to as Gnostic 
literature, does represent a valid and very close connected tradition to the teachings of Jesus himself, and 
this Gospel, like the majority of the other Gnostic texts, does not emphasize the great prophet's death and 
resurrection and its meaning for the salvation of mankind, but on the notion of the knowledge which he 
revealed to his followers, hidden in secret teachings and rituals which the masses could not understand or 
comprehend - a notion that clearly found few proponents in the early Christian Church Fathers.

Jesus saw some babies nursing. He said to his disciples, "These nursing babies are like those who enter the 
(Father's) kingdom."  They said to him, "Then shall we enter the (Father's) kingdom as babies?"  Jesus said to 
them, "When you make the two into one, and when you make the inner like the outer and the outer like the 
inner, and the upper like the lower, and when you make male and female into a single one, so that the male will 
not be male nor the female be female, when you make eyes in place of an eye, a hand in place of a hand, a foot 
in place of a foot, an image in place of an image, then you will enter [the kingdom]. 

The theme of the Gospel of Thomas runs from esoteric teachings of inner, hidden knowledge as evidenced 
from the quotation above, but reference to a variety of other parables some of which are also found in the 
canonical Gospels, speaking to the validity of the tradition represented by the Gospel of Thomas as well as 
the varying interpretations of the message of the historical Jesus that existed in the few centuries after his 
death.  In this gospel, Jesus's divinity is not explicitly referred to, nor is the story of his death by crucifixion or 
resurrection from the dead, the theme of the Gospel is the "hidden words that the living Jesus spoke and 
Didymos Judas Thomas wrote down", as is stated in the introduction, the hidden and secret nature of the 
teaching lends itself to Gnostic classification, and clearly it circulated in Gnostic like esoteric and mystical 
communities as evidenced by it being found in the Nag Hammadi Library, which also contained an excerpt 
from Plato's Republic, speaking to the continuity and synthesis of the Platonic teachings alongside the 
Gospels in the early Gnostic movement.
Another Gnostic classified text which is worth mentioning is the so-called the Apocryphon of John from the 
second century CE (it was known to Irenaeus and mentioned in his Against Heresies) which survives in four 
extant manuscripts in varying lengths, three of which were found in the Nag Hammadi Library, and narrates 
an alternative story of creation which can only be looked at as an attempt to the synthesize the Demiurge of 
Plato, the Yahweh of the Jews and the one true God the Father that Jesus speaks of in some sort of coherent 
story line.  The cosmological account describes the single unified and eternal principle of the Monad from 
which all creation comes forth and from which the Aeons emerge, Light (which is synonymous with Christ) 
and Mind being some of the basic constituents of the early creation and from which further Aeons and 
powers are created.  Eventually one of these Aeons, sophia, without consent of the Monad and without the 
aid of a male companion brings forth an entity named Yaltabaoth, who is the first of a series of fallible and 
less that purely divine heavenly creatures called Archons and from which our heavenly and earthly creation is 
formed and from which salvation, via Christ, is required in order that eternal life and balance to the universe 
be restored.
The Pistis Sophia, a Gnostic text of somewhat later origin from maybe the third or fourth century CE, relates 
the gnostic teachings of Jesus to his disciples after he is resurrected from the dead, alluding to period of 11 
years that he taught his disciples after his death by crucifixion.  In this text Sophia also plays a prominent role 
and is associated as the consort of Christ, the revealer of mysteries, the Heavenly Mother, the Psyche of the 
world and even as the female aspect of Logos.  The Pistis Sophia describes the highest realm of the light, the 
nature and subsistence of souls after death, and the way of salvation through initiation into the mysteries of 
Christ.  This book quotes from Psalms, from prophets of the Old Testament, as well as from some of the 
canonical Gospels and despite its Gnostic bent retains some of the core Christian theological features that 
survived into orthodox Christianity, with an altogether esoteric and mystery cultish bent consistent with the 
Gnostic sects and schools of thought from which it must have emerged.

What we can clearly say about Gnosticism in general, despite the differences among the various so-called 
"Gnostic" schools themselves is that they shared an esoteric view of the interpretation of the teachings of 
Christ and that they developed various cosmogonies which although stemmed from the spherical notion of 
the heavens which has become the predominant astronomical picture of the times (think Ptolemy) but they 
looked upon these spheres not just as an astronomical system but also as a system for the ascent of the soul, 
an ascent that in their view Jesus had outlined for them in his "hidden" teachings and one which, according 
the some astrological teachings reflected the "descent" of the soul into this world.  
Interestingly, most of the Gnostic teachers claimed close lineage to the Apostles themselves - Valentinus to 
St. Paul and Basilides to Matthew for example and both these early Gnostic teachers were from Alexandria of 
course, the home and heart of Hellenic philosophy in the first few centuries after Christ and where many of 
the most influential of the early Christian Church Fathers were schooled and taught as well.  Despite their 
differences however, their doctrines focused less on the physical life and death of Christ but the eternal 
message that lied within his secret teachings and the mystical and esoteric meanings that were to be gleaned 
from his teachings from the vantage point of the "ascent of the soul", i.e. gnosis.  
The Gnostic tradition was a mystic one no doubt, one that had many heads and many variations in practice, 
but they were at the least united on Christ as the consort of sophia, and that it was the flawed Demiurge (the 
Old Testament God) who needed to be bailed out of his self-created predicament by Christ the savior.  So 
while their worship of Jesus as the messiah was consistent, as well as their view of him as the personified 
Logos of God, there were clearly different interpretations of the underlying world order and mythos within 
which his teachings were interpreted throughout the Gnostic landscape, and they also held different views 
than what came to be understood as the orthodox Christian position with respect to the reality and meaning 
of the so-called "Passion" of Christ.
To the Gnostics, and even to Clement of Alexandria (among others such as Irenaeus most notably) who spoke 
against them, it was Jesus who was the new song for the new age.  They just disagreed on the song itself, but 
their tune was not altogether different.  The message spoke consistently of the true existence of eternal life, 
and Christ's role in teaching, illustrating and at some level "granting" it to all who looked to him as the carrier 
of the true message of salvation for the "new age", even if they each presented a somewhat different picture 
as to how Christ fit into the eternal celestial and cosmological structure that underpinned creation itself.  
Although it's hard to sum up and categorize the position of the various Gnostic sects which from a certain 
vantage point sat in opposition to the more orthodox interpretations of Christian theology as espoused in the 
Epistles of Paul and the canonical Gospels of Mathew, Mark, Luke and John, it is clear that this tradition 
represented some sort of threat to the growing power of the Christian authority which chose to focus less on 
his "mystery" and "secret doctrine" and more on his birth, teachings and resurrection as relayed in the 
canonical Gospels, and the reliance on his words as captured therein that spoke to Christ the savior as being 
the only gateway to heaven. 

According to the Gnostics, this world, the material cosmos, is the result of a primordial error on the part of a 
supra-cosmic, supremely divine being, usually called sophia (Wisdom) or simply the Logos.  This being is 
described as the final emanation of a divine hierarchy, called the Plêrôma or "Fullness," at the head of which 
resides the supreme God, the One beyond Being.  The error of sophia, which is usually identified as a reckless 
desire to know the transcendent God, leads to the hypostatization of her desire in the form of a semi-divine and 
essentially ignorant creature known as the Demiurge (Greek: dêmiourgos, "craftsman"), or Ialdabaoth 
[Yaltabaoth], who is responsible for the formation of the material cosmos.  This act of craftsmanship is actually 
an imitation of the realm of the Pleroma, but the Demiurge is ignorant of this, and hubristically declares himself 
the only existing God.  At this point, the Gnostic revisionary critique of the Hebrew Scriptures begins, as well as 
the general rejection of this world as a product of error and ignorance, and the positing of a higher world, to 
which the human soul will eventually return.  However, when all is said and done, one finds that the error of 
sophia and the begetting of the inferior cosmos are occurrences that follow a certain law of necessity, and that 
the so-called "dualism" of the divine and the earthly is really a reflection and expression of the defining tension 
that constitutes the being of humanity-the human being. 

Although it's easy to understand why the early Church rejected these "Gnostic" teachings as heresy, one 
wonders how much of the teachings - as little as we know of them - were true in the sense that they reflect 
what Jesus actually believed and taught to his inner circle.  What also remains a mystery is what schools of 
thought if any, from a philosophical or even mystical perspective, influenced Jesus himself.  Yes he spoke in 
parables and yes he - at least in the last few years of his life - lived and taught in Palestine and of course he 
was a Jew.  What can be said is that he was no doubt exposed to Jewish orthodoxy given his own cultural 
heritage, even if he ultimately rejected it, and was in all likelihood exposed to some of the mystery cult 
traditions that were prevalent in Palestine at the time, the Chaldean Oracles for example, which helped him 
see no doubt the unity of existence and the unity of the individual with the cosmos, but of course it does not 
leave out the possibility that he was simply divinely illuminated himself without any outside assistance or 
prodding - an unlikely scenario but a possibility nonetheless.
Looked at in this way, it is clear why the orthodox Christian tradition had to fully reject the Gnostic 
interpretation and view of Jesus as it represented not just a threat to the power of the Church itself (for if 
Christians didn't need the Church then upon what authority would they stand?), but a completely different 
interpretation and underlying mythos for the explanation of reality.  This essentially was the great divide 
between the orthodox interpretations of Christ and Gnosticism.  
Leaving the mystical bent of the Gnostic tradition aside, which in and of itself threatened the emerging 
authoritarian structure of the Church, there was still a major theological divergence from a cosmological and 
causality perspective, that separated the two opposing perspectives on the meaning of the Life and Death of 
Christ - the one orthodox view that his life, in its divine character, its extraordinary and miraculous beyond 
belief story line, was in itself his message and his life should be worshipped, and sanctified and celebrated, 
and the other Gnostic view looked more upon his life not as existing actually but took more of an esoteric 
and mystical vantage point, where the Christ was not actually born and did not die but in fact lived eternally 
as a manifestation of the Logos and which bridged the Jewish conception of God and the conception of God 
as put forth by Jewish as reconcilable in a different light than (what became) the standard orthodox view.  
The standard view became, and in many respects was forced to become, the doctrine of the Trinity which 
spoke of Father, a Son, and a Holy Spirit who were of one, unqualified substance (homoousios) which moved 
the waters at the beginning of time itself (Genesis), and were undivided and ontologically equivalent and yet 
at the same time different manifestations of the great unified force of the undivided One, providing the 
theological explanation to the various passages in the (orthodox) Bible which were seemingly contradictory 
and retaining the unity of God in no uncertain terms.