
As we trace the intellectual developments through beyond Middle Ages into and beyond the Enlightenment 
Era, we find that reason and logic, referred to more specifically as rationalism and empiricism, become the 
predominant intellectual building blocks of scientific inquiry, what had been studied under the heading of 
natural philosophy since the time of Aristotle, thereafter.  This era of modern Science, i.e. the so-called 
Quantum Era, a byproduct of the discoveries that were later categorized and glorified by historians as the 
"Scientific Revolution" began with the revolutionary idea first put forth by Copernicus (1473 - 1543), and 
then confirmed and heralded by Galileo (1564 - 1642), that in fact the earth, and man along with it, was not 
in fact the center of the universe.  This view had held by all scholars, theologians and intellectuals since the 
time of Ptolemy (100 - 170 CE) in the second century CE and proved in no uncertain terms the now common 
adage, "old habits die hard".
These no less than revolutionary discoveries, which took generations to become firmly established as "truth", 
laid the groundwork for the developments of Sir Isaac Newton (1643 - 1727), who with the aid of the now 
heliocentric model of the universe, "discovered" his famous three laws of motion which provide the basis 
even today for Classical Mechanics, or what is sometimes called Newtonian Mechanics in his honor.  This new 
worldview was characterized and framed by who established beyond a shadow of a doubt, via various 
mathematical laws and theorems which accurately predicted behaviors of planets as well as other objects, 
that the earth in fact revolved around the sun driven by a new force which he called gravity, and that matter 
and objects on earth behaved according to the same laws which governed the motions of the planets, just on 
a smaller scale and subject to the massive gravitational force of the earth.  
These so-called laws of motion all rested on very specific and well defined mathematical theorems alongside 
very specific measurement criteria such as "mass", "velocity", "acceleration" and "force", establishing and 
solidifying not only the basic principles and terminology of modern science, but also firmly entrenching the 
idea that the natural world not only obeyed consistent laws and patterns, but that these patterns and laws 
were best explained and described via mathematics.  Mathematics was the language of God as it were - at 
least as seen by the Enlightenment Era thinkers - and little did they understand the full implications of the 
profound and ground breaking "discoveries" that these new laws represented.  These three laws of motion, 
what has come to represent the basis of Newtonian Mechanics became, and still remain to this day, the 
cornerstones of modern Physics.  Alongside Classical Mechanics, empiricism became the guiding principle for 
establishing the basic characteristics of all Scientific inquiry.  
The Age of Science had begun, and with it, as perhaps an unintended byproduct, came the relegation of 
theology and philosophy (i.e. all those domains of knowledge that had previously fallen under the heading of 
philosophy other than natural philosophy as Aristotle had defined the various branches of knowledge that is), 
along with the closely affiliated fields of morality and ethics (what Aristotle had referred to as practical 
philosophy which had always been and continued to be closely tied to, and resting on the fundamental belief 
in the existence of the Soul, aka theology), to fundamentally "nonscientific" inquiry.  These "nonscientific" 
fields are typically categorized within the academic and scholarly community mostly under the broad heading 
of "humanities" today, outside of theology proper of course which for the most part remains squarely within 
the domain of religion which is considered by most, certainly in the academic community, to be a wholly 
separate and distinct field of knowledge from "science" given its lack of "empirical" foundations.  
It is this bridging of this intellectual gap between a) the existence of God and the Soul, as well as the field of 
morality and ethics, together with b) the pure rationalist and empiricist pursuits that established the basis for 
"physical reality" and became the hallmark of modern Science (again what was called natural philosophy 
from the time of Aristotle straight through the Enlightenment Era and certainly by the great thinkers and 
innovators who drove the Scientific Revolution  which was the life's work of Immanuel Kant (1724 - 1804) 
in fact.  His philosophy, which came to be known as transcendental idealism, was designed specifically to 
bring all of these various intellectual and metaphysical domains which had been broken apart as an 
unintended byproduct of Enlightenment Era philosophical and scientific developments under one intellectual 
roof as it were, bringing them all together under the more broad and abstract heading of "Reason", which to 
him formed the basis of all knowledge - knowledge of both of the physical world which was underpinned by 
rationalism and empiricism, as well as the ontological preeminence of the ideas, to which the domain of 
theology, morality and ethics belonged, which had been the subject of attack during the Enlightenment Era 
due to its "supposed" lack of rational foundations. 
Despite Kant's work however, most of his works being published toward the end of the 18th and century, 
materialism and causal determinism became the most influential philosophical principles which underpinned 
this new age of scientific development, which although had clearly liberated academics and scholars to 
pursue knowledge for knowledge's sake without the fear of persecution of the religious authorities which has 
been one of the hallmarks of the Scientific Revolution, nonetheless established the groundwork not just for 
the split of the various domains of knowledge which had hitherto all fallen under the broad heading of 
Philosophy, but also laid the groundwork for subsequent developments in scientific inquiry which for the 
most part fell under the domain of Physics.  In other words, even though virtually all of the major thinkers of 
the Enlightenment Era (with very few notable exceptions) had not, nor would they have ever referred to 
themselves as "atheists" per se, their intellectual developments and innovations in terms of how knowledge 
itself was to be ascertained, and how in fact it was to be defined, nonetheless changed the center of gravity 
of intellectual developments and academic study as a whole.  The academic and intellectual community 
shifted from being less "theologically based" - i.e. the study of the laws of nature and the laws of man within 
the context of mankind's place in the universe which presumed the existence of some divine creator as well 
as a Soul which was to be judged by this creator upon death or at the time of revelation as well as a moral 
and ethical framework which could be deduced directly from this theological framework - to a focus on the 
"discovery" of further natural laws which explained natural phenomenon, laws which were not necessarily 
based upon Reason necessarily (as had Kant's system as well as some of his rationalist and empiricist 
predecessors), but were based upon mathematical laws that could accurately predict "measurable 
phenomenon".  
Although this seems like a subtle distinction, and most certainly this emphasis and focus did not change 
overnight, it came to had very broad reaching implications within the academic and scientific community as 
the rate of progression of scientific innovation and discovery increased in the 19th and 20th centuries as 
objective realism, and its theo-philosophical counterpart naturalism, began to replace nearly all other theo-
philosophical belief systems within the scientific community, the community as it turns out that was, and still 
is to a large extent, began to viewed as the height of the intellectual and academic community at large.  The 
brightest of the bright and the smartest of the smart.  The individuals that were considered by the public to 
hold not only the highest place in the scientific community - the Theoretical Physicists as they have come to 
be known - but the one's that also were looked to as the keepers and definers of "knowledge" and "reality" 
itself.  By the end of the twentieth century in fact, the tables had almost entirely turned.
It wasn't necessarily that the belief in a Creator had been abandoned per se by the philosophers and 
scientists of the Enlightenment Era, it had most certainly not in fact, but it had been superseded, subsumed 
so to speak, by the belief that the material universe, the substance of Aristotle,  obeyed natural laws which 
could be "discovered" and could be, in fact should be, best described by advanced mathematics.  So a 
byproduct of the Scientific Revolution was not so much materialism and atheism, but the introduction of 
advanced mathematics as the language of God. 
With Newton (1642-1727 CE) then, in particular with his law of universal gravitation and the three laws of 
motion as articulated in his  Philosophiæ Naturalis Principia Mathematica (Mathematical Principles of Natural 
Philosophy) first published in 1687, the foundations of mechanism and determinism, two of the most 
prevailing philosophical principles of the twentieth century - the notion that the world can be completely and 
entirely explained through mechanical and mathematical laws which had at their basis the principles of cause 
and effect -  but also the natural extension of this premise which was determinism, i.e. the belief that the 
course of the universe was laid out entirely by cause and effect which was driven by these same 
mathematical laws and principles that governed materialism. 
Although traces of these basic principles can most certainly be found in Aristotle, he in no way abandoned 
the notion of a) the existence of the Soul, or b) the notion of Free Will, both of which formed the prevailing 
notions of his system of ethics, just as it did for Plato in fact.    But it however undoubtedly in the work of Sir 
Isaac Newton  that we find the establishment of the field of what we now refer to as Physics, along with the 
root and origin of what today we refer to as materialism, i.e. this notion of knowledge being defined or 
bounded by what can be measured or quantified, i.e. objective realism.
It is however, whether intentional or not, with Newtonian Mechanics, that we find the root origins of this 
now ubiquitous materialistic worldview which permeates Western culture and society.  For if the entire 
physical world not only defines the boundaries of knowledge and truth itself, but is also at the same time 
fundamentally and intrinsically governed by not only the laws of cause and effect but also by mathematical 
principles in toto, and in turn all of the laws that govern this material universe are "discoverable", then what 
room is there from an epistemological perspective for the Soul?  Or Free Will?  Or myth even?  Whose 
purpose is arguably to stir or "speak" to the Soul at some basic level.  Or to take the logic on step further, 
what is the purpose or fundamental nature of ethics or morality for that matter?  Outside of their place in the 
social and political spheres of democracy, and in the West capitalism, which is more focused on the 
preservation of property and the civil obedience of of society at large, and the protection of basic property 
rights and "liberty", or "freedom" at some level because they promote a healthy and growing society and 
protect, at least in theory, this idea of "freedom" which is open to interpretation to say the least.  These 
fundamental tenets of "democracy" as we define it in the West is primarily predicated not on the reality of 
ethics or morality necessarily, but on the existence of some form of natural law", as put forth initially by the 
Stoics in classical antiquity to a large extent and then echoed by much of the political philosophy which 
emerges alongside philosophy proper in the Enlightenment Era which in no small measure provided the 
impetus for the English, American, and French Revolutions of the 17th and 18th centuries, the end and 
culmination of which marks the end of the Age of Enlightenment.

The word Science derives from the Latin sciencia, meaning knowledge or "that which can be known", and is a 
derivation of the Latin verb scire, or "to know".  Sciencia is the Latin translation of the Aristotelian term 
epistêmê which meant the same, i.e. knowledge, although epistêmê the way Aristotle used it had a much 
broader meaning than the term "science" does today, and Aristotle spelled out in painstaking, and broader 
detail, the various types and domains of "knowledge", its Categories, and even a broad description of Being 
itself, or "existence", i.e. being qua being which represented not the sum total of knowledge but just one of 
the fundamental aspects of knowledge.  At some level, the bulk of the corpus of Aristotle's work could be 
considered the rational framework for knowledge itself, what modern philosophers refer to as epistemology.  
What is clear however, is that the terminology we use today to discern and distinguish between the various 
branches of "knowledge", and even the word "science" itself, have their origins in the semantic and linguistic 
framework which Aristotle put forth some 2500 years ago.  
The word sciencia as a derivation of the Greek word epistêmê used by Aristotle was carried down through the 
Middle Ages well into the Age of Enlightenment and right down through to the modern era of "science".  And 
what we consider science today, whether intentionally or not, has become almost metaphysically and 
ontologically equivalent with our modern conception of "reality", and even in a more broad sense, "truth" 
itself.  This fact, again intentional or not, is the reason why any field or branch of knowledge that exists 
outside of Science, i.e. lays outside of the domain of empirical or verifiable "proof" as it were, is in turn less 
precise, or less "true", is "subjective" and therefore imbued with opinion and subject to interpretation to 
some degree.  This is what separates philosophical inquiry, which includes metaphysics, as we understand it 
today in academic circles, as well as the rest of the Humanities for the most part, from the grand pedestal of 
Science as the benchmark of not just reality but again, in the extreme view, truth itself.  
Aristotle's epistêmê, what came to be known as "sciencia" in the West and the Scholastic method of teaching 
which was a hallmark of the European system of education throughout the Middle Ages, provides the basis 
for the categorization of all intellectual study and intellectual disciplines in the West all the way through to 
the Enlightenment Era, after which - once freed from the dogmatism and intellectual and metaphysical 
inflexibility enforced by the doctrines of the Church governed by their specific interpretation of Christian 
Scripture - the various branches of knowledge that were are more familiar with today begin to take shape, 
culminating from a natural philosophical perspective in Newton's great work Philosophiæ Naturalis Principia 
Mathematica, which in many respects marks the beginning of modern Science, and from which the modern 
field of Physics as we know it today ultimately emerges.
Newton's seminal work outlined the core mathematical principles that governed the physical world, the field 
of natural philosophy which again harkened all the way back to the categorization of the various domains of 
knowledge, epistêmê, by Aristotle.  Aristotle again distinguished various domains of knowledge, of which 
ethics and morality of course was one (falling under the heading of practical philosophy) and natural 
philosophy was the term he used to denote the field of study of the world that was subject to change, which 
to the Enlightenment Era philosophers, the first scientists really, came to be known as the domain of Physics.  
[Aristotle however, and this point cannot be overemphasized, also called out specifically the branch of 
knowledge which was to be studied "before" (meta) physics, as first philosophy, what we now refer to as 
metaphysics, again using his terminology.]
But in the subsequent centuries following the adoption and establishment of Newtonian Mechanics in the 
academic and intellectual community, the word "science" becomes rooted in Western academia and 
effectively replaces the old term "natural philosophy", reflecting the displacement of Aristotle's framework 
for epistêmê which had persisted for over a thousand years.  This linguistic shift had the unintended effect of 
relegating the branches of knowledge or study outside of science proper, and physics even to a lesser extent, 
as not just separate domains or fields of study, but also as "less accurate", less "refined" and in some sense 
"less true" or "real" disciplines since they did not have a basis in measureable and empirically verifiable, 
reproducible and predictable results.  The implications of this slight shift in how knowledge and reality itself 
comes to be defined and perceived again cannot be overstated. 
Theology, or Religion, and its natural cousin the domain of ethics and morality, from the perspective of the 
academic community given this shift in the definition and classification of knowledge in toto, was to say the 
least relegated and pushed aside, isolated as it were into the domain of religion for the most part, or even 
worse into the newly relegated and much more isolated and restricted domain of "philosophy", which no 
longer included natural philosophy of course, but even no longer included Aristotle's first philosophy, the 
latter of which was at some level equated with theology and/or philosophy in its new, restricted definitive 
form.  
This further delineation and distinction between the various branches of knowledge and the break of Science 
from the rest of the field so to speak, is one of the most important side effects of the Scientific Revolution.  
On the one hand, it "liberated" Science from Religion and allowed it to be pursued and to evolve 
independent of any pre-conceived theological or even political motivations (at least in theory) but on the 
other hand it slowly and gradually began to not just supplant religion as the hallmark of truth, but also 
supplant first philosophy, i.e. metaphysics, as the final measure of reality.
Between Newton and Einstein, the two most influential Physicists of the modern era (if you can call Newton a 
physicist even though there was no such thing in Newton's time), we do find a variety of developments in not 
only the field of Astronomy, which tested and verified Newton's laws on universal gravitation and motion, 
but also in the fields of Optics, Electricity and Magnetism, work which culminated in the 19th century with the 
discovery of what are called Maxwell's Equations, a theoretical, and of course mathematical, model that 
consolidated and integrated the previously separate domains of optics, magnetism and electricity under the 
heading of electrodynamics, proving that all three of these previously distinct domains were actually just 
manifestations of the same underlying force, a force subsequently referred to as electromagnetism.
As experimentation and testing of theories advanced however, and instrumentation became more advanced 
and precise, various holes and inconsistencies developed which pointed to cracks not only in Newtonian 
Mechanics itself, but also with Maxwell's mathematical and theoretical models surrounding the new, 
consolidated field of electromagnetism.  These inconsistencies, or perhaps better-termed irregularities, to a 
very great extent provided the impetus for Einstein's original work in Physics before he developed his 
Relativity Theory.  
Einstein is best known for two fundamentally radical scientific developments that forever changed the course 
of scientific history, Relativity Theory which built upon and effectively supplanted Newtonian Mechanics as 
the dominant model of the physical universe, reconciling inconsistencies in some of the astronomical 
observations of his time and at the same time upending the notion that time was a constant force that 
moved at a constant rate of progress no matter where you were or how fast you were traveling in relative 
space, and of course his discovery of the equivalence between mass and energy that is captured in the 
elegant and now famous equation 〖E=mc〗^2, both revolutionary theories that were to forever change 
the nature of physics.
His Relativity Theory is actually broken into two parts, the first of which is Special Relativity which posits an 
altogether new structure of the physical universe by integrating the notion of space and time, what he called 
spacetime, and General Relativity, which builds off of the developments of his Special Relativity Theory and 
postulated a notion of universal gravitation at the cosmic, as well as earthly scale.  Both theories rested 
squarely on the idea that the speed of light is constant in the universe (186,000 miles per second), no matter 
what an observer's frame of reference and no matter how fast an observer is moving relative to the object of 
measurement.  
Einstein was undoubtedly the most influential physicist of the 20th century, the century that ushered in the 
so-called "Quantum Era", and his work was truly ground breaking and represented a major step in the 
development of advanced mathematical models to represent the world around us at the cosmic scale, 
illustrating to the academic and intellectual communities at the time, i.e. physicists and scientists, that the 
world as they knew it was not as simple as had been previously thought.  Although Einstein is best known for 
his theories on Relativity and mass-energy equivalence however, the work that he actually won the Nobel 
Prize for in 1921 (at the age of 42) actually created some of the building blocks for what later became the 
field of Quantum Mechanics, a theory incidentally that Einstein voiced great concern with over the course of 
his career, calling it "incomplete" or at the very least missing some key variables/inputs. 
Einstein was just as much of a philosopher as he was a physicist however, and much of the latter part of his 
career he not only questioned the premise of the quantum mechanical models that began to take shape 
during the middle of the twentieth century, but he also spent a good deal of his time thinking and writing 
about what the great "discoveries" of twentieth century physics actually meant, i.e. their relevance to and 
about the world we lived in from a metaphysical and theological perspective.  In his view, the advancements 
in Physics marked by General Relativity and Quantum Theory were not simply mathematical and 
measurement tools to aid the development of science and technological advancement, but also had serious 
implications on the nature of reality itself, as well as God's role in the creation and sustenance of said reality. 
Perhaps the most notable example of the moral dilemma which Einstein faced with respect to technological 
advancement as a result of developments in Physics in the first half of the twentieth century and their social 
as well as ethical implications is illustrated in his involvement, and subsequent regret, in the famed 
Manhattan Project, the US Government funded initiative during WW II that developed, and of course then 
later used, the atomic bomb against Japan in 1945.  Despite his later public regrets on the subject, Einstein 
contributed significantly to these efforts which ran for some seven years, cost the United States nearly 2 
billion dollars, and at its height employed more than 130,000 people.  
Albert Einstein was born in Germany in 1879 and spent most of his formative years there in school.  His 
father was an electrical engineer so you could say that the study of electrical currents, and science in general, 
was inherited to a great extent.  He supposedly wrote his first paper on scientific topics at the age of 16 on 
the behavior of magnetic fields, a work entitled On the Investigation of the State of the Ether in a Magnetic 
Field.  In 1900 Einstein's was awarded his degree in teaching from the Zurich Polytechnical school and after 
struggling for almost two years to find a job, he finally landed work in Bern, Switzerland, at the Federal Office 
for Intellectual Property as an assistant examiner where he evaluated patent applications for electromagnetic 
devices.  Interestingly enough, his work in the patent office was very much in line with his later research and 
thinking with respect to the transmission of electric signals and the synchronization of time, concepts which 
played a significant role in the subsequent development of his theories in electromagnetism and Physics 
which had such a profound effect on modern Science.
On 30 April 1905, Einstein was awarded a doctorate in Physics by the University of Zurich with his thesis A 
New Determination of Molecular Dimensions.  That same year he also published papers on the photoelectric 
effect (for which he later won a Nobel Prize in Physics), Brownian motion which developed mathematical 
models describing the motion of particles suspended in a fluid, liquid or gas, Special Relativity, and the 
relationship of mass and energy as a function of the speed of light, marking the beginning of decades of 
revolutionary scientific developments at both the cosmic and subatomic scale.   
Einstein's work on the photoelectric effect in particular had significant impact on the subsequent 
development of the Quantum Theory.  For it proved that when certain types of matter were bombarded with 
short-wave electromagnetism, they emitted what Einstein referred to as photoelectrons, particles which later 
came to be known simply as photons, the study of which led directly to some of the most odd and mysterious 
behaviors that have come to characterize Quantum Theory, i.e. the fact that light behaves both like a particle 
and a wave depending upon the experiment used to study it.  This discovery led to important developments 
in understanding the quantized nature of light, i.e. it's characteristic to move from state to state in a non-
continuous fashion, a discovery which in many respects formed the basis of Quantum Mechanics. 
At the beginning of the rise of Nazi power in Germany in the 1930s, and while visiting Universities in the 
United States in 1933, Germany passed a law barring Jews from holding official positions, including teaching 
at Universities, and it is said that Einstein also learned at this time that there was a bounty placed on his 
head.  Einstein then moved to the United States in 1933 permanently, as the Nazis rose in power in his 
homeland of Germany.  There he took up a position at the Institute for Advanced Study at Princeton 
University, a position which he held until his death in 1955.  During this period, Einstein spent much of his 
intellectual pursuits trying to come up with a unified theory that incorporated his models of Relativity (the 
General case) which dealt with the behaviors of massive bodies, light and time at a cosmic scale, and 
Quantum Mechanics which dealt with the description of the world at the microscopic and subatomic scale, 
an endeavor which the field of Theoretical Physics still struggles with to this day.

On a more personal level, Einstein was a great lover of music and an accomplished violinist.  His mother was a 
pianist and Einstein was taught the violin at a very early age, supposedly starting at the age of 5, although he 
is said to have taken up music more passionately in his teenage years where he grew a great affection for the 
work of Mozart.  His music is thought to have played a significant role in his social life over the years, as he is 
noted to have played violin in Germany and Switzerland with friends, most notably with Max Planck and his 
son prior to moving to the States in 1933, and then in the United States as well later in life at Princeton 
University where he is said to have joined in with the famed Julliard Quartet on occasion.
From a pure Science and Physics perspective however, it is Einstein's work on Relativity and the equivalence 
of mass and energy that gained him the popularity and repute that still stands to this day.  His theories on 
Relativity are separated into what he referred to as the "Special" case, which was published initially in 1905 
where he posited the notion of spacetime as a holistic construct within which classical Newtonian mechanical 
observations of "physical bodies" and "motion" must be viewed in order to be fully consistent and coherent, 
and the "General" case which expanded upon Special Relativity to include a more general case which 
included mathematical formulae for measuring Classical Mechanical attributes such as mass and speed when 
no reference system existed from which the measurements could be made and sat relative to.
Special Relativity is the physical theory of measurement in an inertial frame of reference and was proposed 
by Einstein in a paper in 1905 entitled On the Electrodynamics of Moving Bodies.  The paper reconciled James 
Clerk Maxwell's mathematical models (aka Maxwell's Equations) on electricity and magnetism which had 
been published in the 1860s, with the laws of mechanics as described by Galileo and Newton.  Einstein 
reconciled these seemingly disparate fields of study by introducing major changes to mechanics close to 
the speed of light.  This work only later became known as the Theory of Special Relativity , which is 
distinguished from the Theory of General Relativity in that it considers the frame of reference of the 
observer, whereas General Relativity assumes all observers are equivalent. 
In his work on Special Relativity, Einstein generalizes Galileo's notion of relativity - which states that all 
uniform motion is relative and that there is no absolute and well-defined state of rest - from classical 
mechanics to all the laws of Physics, including both the laws of Classical Mechanics as well as the new field of 
electrodynamics, unifying these hitherto seemingly distinct scientific fields of study, a unique characteristic of 
many of his scientific breakthroughs in fact, and one which plagued him toward the end of his life as he failed 
to come up with a unifying theory which encompassed Quantum Mechanics and General Relativity.
He sums up his synthesis of the field of electrodynamics and Classical Mechanics leveraging this principle of 
the constant speed of light no matter what an observer's frame of reference is in the opening section from 
one of the seminal papers he published in 1905 called On the Electrodynamics of Moving Bodies:

... the same laws of electrodynamics and optics will be valid for all frames of reference for which the equations 
of mechanics hold good.  We will raise this conjecture (the purport of which will hereafter be called the 
"Principle of Relativity") to the status of a postulate, and also introduce another postulate, which is only 
apparently irreconcilable with the former, namely, that light is always propagated in empty space with a 
definite velocity c which is independent of the state of motion of the emitting body.  These two postulates 
suffice for the attainment of a simple and consistent theory of the electrodynamics of moving bodies based on 
Maxwell's theory for stationary bodies.  


Much of Einstein's work on Special Relativity can also be seen as an extension, or at least complementary, to 
the work of the Russian theoretical physicist and mathematician Hermann Minkowski, a contemporary of 
Einstein.  More specifically, it was Minkowski's notion of spacetime, which extended the 3-dimensional 
classical view of reality based upon the algebraic geometry of Euclid, Galileo and Descartes among others, to 
include a fourth dimension of time to come up with a more complete description of the frame of reference 
for an "event":
 
The views of space and time which I wish to lay before you have sprung from the soil of experimental physics, 
and therein lies their strength.  They are radical.  Henceforth space by itself, and time by itself, are doomed to 
fade away into mere shadows, and only a kind of union of the two will preserve an independent reality. 

What the Theory Special Relativity states basically, and much of its theoretical implications have been 
experimentally verified at this point, is that the concepts of "space" and "time", which had been looked at as 
constants no matter what the reference point for the previous two millennia, had to be considered relative - 
relative in the sense that their measurement and value depended upon the frame of reference, and the 
speed, at which the observer was moving.  To arrive at these conclusions, and implicit in the theorems and 
mathematics behind the theory, the speed of light was presumed to be fixed from all vantage points and 
frames of reference.  Furthermore, and this was no small contribution of course, it posits and proves that 
mass and energy are equivalent, as expressed in the famous equation E = mc2.

 
Figure 33: Illustration of the curvature of spacetime in Einstein's Theory of General Relativity 

General Relativity, as it was later called to distinguish itself from Special Relativity, was developed to apply 
the principle of Special Relativity to the more general case, i.e. to any frame of reference.  General Relativity 
introduces Einstein's theory of gravity, as it exists and acts upon bodies in motion in the spacetime 
continuum that is established in Special Relativity.  Whereas Special Relativity restricts itself to a flat 
spacetime continuum where cosmic scale gravitational effects are negligent, in General Relativity 
gravitational effects are represented as curvatures of spacetime, i.e. at the cosmic scale gravity affects the 
very nature of the spacetime continuum itself.   And just as the curvature of the earth's surface is not 
noticeable in everyday life and can be effectively ignored in everyday life (when measuring distance or speed 
for example), the curvature of spacetime can be effectively ignored on smaller, non-cosmic scales of 
measurement.  In other words, Special Relativity, is a valid approximation of General Relativity at smaller, 
non-cosmic scales.
From Einstein's General Relativity theory then, we not only have the beginnings of the establishment of the 
model within which the cosmos itself can be studied, introducing the basic principles that are used to this day 
that define modern Cosmology culminating perhaps most notably in the discovery of modern conceptions of 
the beginning of the universe known as Big Bang Theory in the latter part of the twentieth century, but we 
also have a dissolution of the notions of space and time as absolute, independent entities, bringing an end to 
the era of absolute physical existence which had been an implicit assumption of Western physicists, 
philosophers, naturalists and theologians for at least some 2000 years or so.