
As civilizations and empires emerged in the ancient Mediterranean and Near East, there was a need, a 
vacuum if you will, for a theological/religious force to keep these vast empires together.  One can see this 
reflected in the proliferation of the pantheon of Egyptian/Greek/Roman gods whose worship dominated 
their respective cultures and societies in the Mediterranean and North Africa in the first millennium BCE, 
gods who were synthesized and brought together as the civilizations from which they originated slowly 
merged and commingled through trade and warfare.  Also in the first millennium BCE we find the first vast 
empires, initially with the Assyrians and Persians and then followed by the Greeks, all of which not only 
facilitated trade throughout the region but also drove cultural assimilation as well.
In no small measure out of reaction to what was considered dated or ignorant belief systems, belief systems 
that merely reinforced the ruling class and were not designed to provide real true insight and liberation for 
the individual, emerged the various Greek philosophical schools and teachings, reflecting a deep seated 
dissatisfaction with the religious and mythological systems of the time, as well as even the political systems 
that were dependent on these religious structures for power and authority, to the detriment of society at 
large from the philosophers perspective.  The life and times of Socrates probably best characterizes the 
forces at work during this period, whose teachings inspired Plato and Aristotle alike whose works guided the 
development of the Western mind for some two thousand years.  
Jesus's life in many respects runs parallel to that of Socrates, manifesting and reacting to the same set of 
forces that Socrates rose up against, except slightly further to the East and within the context of Roman 
(Jewish) rule rather than Greek rule, but still reflecting the same rebellion against what he saw as illegitimate 
and abusive authoritarian rule that stifled freedom of thought and freedom of worship in particular.  Jesus's 
message was in many respects lost however, and survives down to us only through translation and 
interpretation that invariably has diluted and bastardized his true teaching, of which only snippets survive 
down to us in the Gospels.  The works of Plato and Aristotle are extant however, at least a good portion of 
them are, so we can analyze and digest their comprehensive philosophical and metaphysical (and in many 
respects theological) belief systems that touch on virtually all aspects of reality, from the nature of existence 
itself, to the source of happiness and the ideal state; the scope of Aristotle's epistêmê.
In the Common Era (CE), aka Anno Domini (AD) or the Year of the Lord, monotheism takes root in the West, 
maturing and evolving in the few hundred years after Jesus's death and in many respects providing the glue 
as well as fuel for expansion of first the Roman Empire and then the Byzantine Empire that followed, and 
then providing the basis of the Islamic Conquests and their subsequent Imperial conquests, the Muslims 
attesting to the same Abrahamic lineage as the Christians and Jews (of which Jesus was of course one, a fact 
Christians sometimes fail to remember).  Although undoubtedly monotheism did borrow and integrate from 
the philosophical traditions that preceded it, mainly to justify and solidify their theological foundations for 
the intellectually minded, with the advent of the authority of the Church which "interpreted" the Christian 
tradition for the good of the masses, there emerged a lasting trend of suppression of rational, or at the very 
least free, thinking that was in any way inconsistent with religious authorities' interpretation of the Bible, the 
Word of God as they called it, or in any way challenged the power of the Church.  In many respects, with the 
rise in power and authority of the Church we see an abandonment of the powers of the mind, the intellect, 
which were held so fast and dear to by Plato and Aristotle.  Reason was abandoned for faith as it were, blind 
faith in God.  The Dark Ages came and went.
Then another intellectual revolution took place some two thousand years after the one that Socrates started 
in ancient Greece, one that unfolds in Western Europe over several centuries marking the end of the Dark 
Ages, starting with what later historians have called the Renaissance, then followed by the Age of 
Enlightenment, a period characterized by the rejection of religious and socio-political orthodoxy and the rise 
of rationalism and empiricism as the basis for knowledge and truth, laying the groundwork for the Scientific 
Revolution which was to follow.
Educational systems akin to colleges, along with a core curriculum of sorts (Scholasticism) start to crop up in 
Western Europe in the Renaissance and Enlightenment Era, providing access to many of the classic texts and 
rational frameworks to more and more learned men, ideas and thoughts that expanded upon mankind's 
notion of reason and its limits, and its relationship to theology and society, begin to be exchanged via letters 
and published works in a way that was not possible prior.  This intellectual groundswell provided the spark 
that ended up burning a deep hole in the blind faith in the literal interpretation of not only the Bible, but 
other revealed Scripture as well, leading to not only waves of skepticism and rationalism from a philosophical 
perspective, but also providing the driving force behind political revolutions first in England (1688), then 
America (1775-1783), and then France (1789-1799), forever changing the political landscape in the West.
This era of intellectual growth culminates from a scientific perspective in the abandonment of the geocentric 
model of the universe, providing the crucial blow into the foundations of all of the Abrahamic religions that 
had dominated theological and philosophical thought in the West for some two thousand years and laying 
the foundation for the predominance of science (natural philosophy) and reason over religion that underpins 
Western thought to this day.  This was the Age of Reason of Thomas Paine, and there was no turning back.
Then came Copernicus, Kepler, Galileo and Newton, with many great thinkers in between of course, 
alongside the philosophical and metaphysical advancements from the likes of Descartes and Kant among 
others, establishing without question empiricism, deduction and scientific method as the guiding principles 
behind which knowledge and reality should be based and providing the philosophical basis for the political 
revolutions that marked the end of the 18th century in England, America and France.
The geometry and Astronomy of the Greeks as it turned out, Euclid and Ptolemy in particular, provided the 
mathematical framework within which the advancements of the Scientific Revolution were made.  Ptolemy's 
geocentric model was upended no doubt in the Enlightenment Era, but his was the model that was refuted in 
the new system put forth by Copernicus some 15 centuries later.  It was the reference point.  And Euclid's 
geometry was superseded, expanded really, by Descartes's model, i.e. the Cartesian coordinate system, 
which provided the basis for analytic geometry and calculus, the mathematical foundations of modern 
physics that are still with us today.  
The twentieth century saw even more rapid developments in Science and in Physics, with the expansion of 
Newtonian Mechanics with Einstein's Theory of Relativity in the early 21st century, and then with the 
subsequent advancement of Quantum Mechanics which followed close behind which provides the 
theoretical foundation for the digital world we live in today.   But the Scientific Revolution of the 17th, 18th 
and 19th centuries did not correspond to the complete abandonment of the notion of an anthropomorphic 
God.  The advancements of this period of Western history provided more of an extension of monotheism, a 
more broad theoretical and metaphysical framework within which the God was to be viewed, rendering the 
holy texts not obsolete per se but rendering them more to the realm of allegory and mythology, and most 
certainly challenging the literal interpretations of the Bible and Qurʾān that had prevailed for centuries.
The twentieth century was different though.  Although you see some scattered references to God (Einstein's 
famous quotation "God does not play dice" for example), the split between Religion and Science is cemented 
in the twentieth century.  The analytic papers and studies that are done, primarily by physicists and scientists, 
although in some cases have a metaphysical bent or at least some form of metaphysical interpretation (i.e. 
what do the theories imply about the underlying reality which they intend to explain), leave the notion of 
God out altogether, a marked contrast to the philosophers and scientists of the Scientific Revolution some 
century or two prior within which the notion of God continued to play a central role if only in terms of the 
underlying faith of the authors.  
The shift in the twentieth century however, which can really only be described as radical even though its 
implications are only inferred and rarely spoken of directly, is the change of faith from an underlying 
anthropomorphic entity/deity that represents the guiding force of the universe and mankind in particular, to 
a faith in the idea that the laws of the universe can be discovered, i.e. that they exist eternally, and that these 
laws themselves are paramount relative to religion or theology which by its very nature does not rest on any 
sound empirical foundation.  Some Enlightenment Era philosophers of course would take issue with this 
claim, but twentieth century Science was about what could be proven experimentally in the physical world, 
not about what could be the result of reason or logical constructs.  
This faith, this transformation of faith from Religion toward Science as it were, is implicit in all the scientific 
developments of the twentieth century, particularly in the physics community, where it is fair to say that any 
statement or position of the role of God in science reflected sheer ignorance, ignorance of the underlying 
framework of laws that clearly governed the behavior of "things", things which were real and which could be 
described in terms of qualities such as mass, energy, momentum, velocity, trajectory, etc.  These constructs 
were much more sound and real than the fluff of the philosophers and metaphysicians, where mind and 
reason, and in fact perception, was on par with the physical world to at least some extent.

In this century of revolutionary and accelerated scientific advancement, the so-called Quantum Era, 
advancement which has fundamentally transformed the world within which we live and has facilitated the 
development of nuclear energy, weapons of mass destruction, and digital computer technology, and has in 
many respects driven tremendous economic progress and prosperity throughout the world, it is science 
driven at its core by advanced mathematics which has emerged as the underlying truth within which the 
universe and reality is perceived.  Mathematical theories and their associated formulas that predicted the 
datum and behavior of not only the objective reality of the forces that prevail on our planet, but also explain 
and predict the behavior of grand cosmological forces; laws which describe the creation and motion of the 
universe and galaxies, the motions of the planets and the stars, and even laws that describe the inner 
workings of planetary and galaxy formation, stars and phenomenon as strange and perplexing as black holes.  
And then to top things off, in the very same century we find that in the subatomic realm the world is 
governed by a seemingly very different set of laws, laws which appear fundamentally incompatible with the 
laws that govern the "classical world".  With the discovery of the laws of Quantum Mechanics, we begin to 
understand the behavior of the subatomic realm, a fantastic, mysterious and extraordinary (and seemingly 
random) world which truly defies imagination, a world where the notion of continuous existence itself is 
called into question.  The Ancient Greek philosophers could have never foreseen wave-particle duality for 
example, and in fact no scientist before the twentieth century would have guessed that the underlying 
substratum of reality could be as strange and perplexing as predicted by Quantum Theory.  
But something was lost as these advancements and "discoveries" were made.  These scientific advancements 
represented "progress" no doubt, bettering the human condition from the perspective of increased flow of 
goods and services, advancements in knowledge and science that have had a direct impact on our ability to 
combat disease and sickness, the ability to support the lives of billions of humans and send probes and space 
ships throughout the solar system to explore other worlds - all of these advancements and innovations and 
many more that are products of the technological and scientific "discoveries" of the modern era.  
On the other hand, as a byproduct of these advancements a sort of social and/or theological intellectual rift 
had been created, one that distanced us as humans not only from each other, but also from the natural world 
and environment, the earth, to which our fate is ultimately tied.  In this context, it seems that sort of 
replacement of the old tried and true religious systems which had served mankind for some 1500 years was 
needed, and this vacuum as it were is one of the main reasons why the ancient Eastern philosophical systems 
have become so prevalent in the West in the last 100 years or so.  People are looking for different 
metaphysical and spiritual frameworks within which to view the world that are not steeped in outdated and 
historically flawed "books" and "scripture" that do not correspond or align to what we know is "true" and 
how the world really works.  
Without religion the however, one can make a strong case for the absence of any basis for the moral and 
ethical framework of society, outside of the rule of law itself.  And while this is a powerful force no doubt, 
one upon which the foundations of democracy in the West is based, one is hard pressed to see real justice 
and equality, and social harmony, within the modern social systems that are based upon this rule of law.  At 
some level, the individual and personal foundations of morality and ethics had effectively been abolished 
with the advent of science, flooding the Western world into conflicts over wealth and access to resources and 
reinforcing materialism and greed, the basic underlying principles of capitalism and free markets.
It wasn't science's fault per se, but the advancements in the last 100 years or so, despite their inherent 
benefits, did leave a vacuum of sorts from a social, ethical and moral perspective, leaving most of the 
intellectual community of the West in need and search of some sort of replacement to that which had been 
lost from a moral and ethical point of view once religion was relegated to, arguably its rightful place, as 
subservient to Reason.  But without religion as a moral force in society and civilization at large, there was no 
longer any self-governing force of "do good to thy neighbor" anymore, no fellowship of the common man.  
What was left to shape our world seemed to be a "what's in it for me" and a "let's see what I can get away 
with" attitude, one that floods the court systems of the West and at some level fuels radical religious groups 
and terrorism itself which sees these Western values as intrinsically "bad" or even "evil", leading to more 
warfare and strife rather than peace and prosperity.  
With the loss of God, his complete removal from the intellectual framework of Western society, there was a 
break in the knowledge and belief in the interconnectedness of humanity and societies at large that had 
served mankind for thousands of years since they had first learned to communicate with each other and first 
told stories about how the world was created and how mankind was "born" and what his relationship to the 
cosmic, universal and natural order was.  
Quantum Theory however, somewhat ironically, called this loss of faith of interconnectedness directly into 
question.  If everything was connected, entangled as it were, at the subatomic realm, if this was a proven and 
scientifically verified fact, how could we not take the next logical step and ask what that meant to our 
worldview?  What did that mean with respect to our understanding of materialism and determinism which 
underpinned Classical Mechanics as well as its socio-economic cousins democracy and capitalism?  "That's a 
philosophical problem" did not seem to be an adequate response, or one which reflects humanities 
responsibilities not only to each other, but to the world at large to which their fates again are ultimately tied.
Abandonment of religion for something more profound was a good thing no doubt, but what was it that 
people really believed in nowadays in the Quantum Era?  That things and people were fundamentally 
separate, that they were operated on by forces that determined their behavior, and that the notion of God 
was for the ignorant and the weak and that eventually all of the underlying behavior and reality could be 
described within the context of the same science which discovered Relativity and Quantum Mechanics.  Or 
worse that these questions themselves were not of concern, that our main concern is the betterment of 
ourselves and our individual families even if that meant those next to us would need to suffer for our gain?  
Well where did that leave us?  Where do ethics and morals fit into a world driven by greed and self-
promotion?
To be fair, there was some movement toward some sort of more refined theological perspective toward the 
end of the twentieth century and into the 21st century, as Yoga starts to become more popular and some of 
the Eastern theo-philosophical traditions such as Daoism and Buddhism start to gain a foothold in the West, 
looked at perhaps as more rational and reasonable systems of belief than the religions of the West which 
have been and remain such a source of conflict and disorder throughout the Western world.  But the driving 
force for this adoption of Yoga in the West seemed to be more aligned with materialism and self-gain than it 
was for spiritual advancement and enlightenment.  This "Eastern" philosophical perspective of compassion 
and mindfulness wasn't permeating into the broader society.  It most certainly wasn't being taught in 
schools, the next generation, the Digital Generation, which in all likelihood look to be even more materialistic 
than their predecessors if that's possible, theology being relegated to the domain of Churches, Synagogues 
and Mosques, the discipline as a whole wasn't even fair game to teach in schools anymore. 
The gap between Science and Religion that emerged as a byproduct of the Scientific Revolution remained 
significant, the last thing you were going to find were scientists messing around with the domain of theology, 
i.e. Religion, for that matter.  Metaphysics maybe, in terms of what the developments of science said about 
reality, but most certainly not theology and definitely not God.  And so our creation myth is bereft of a 
Creator - the Big Bang has no actors, no Intelligent Designers, no Demiurge, simply the primal nuclear and 
subatomic forces at work against particles that expanded and formed gases and planets that ultimately led to 
us - the thinking, rational animal who is actually capable of contemplating and discovering the laws of the 
universe and question our place in them, all a byproduct of natural selection, the guiding force was 
apparently random chance, time, and the genetic encoding of the will to survive as a species.  Such is the 
teachings of Darwin, perhaps one of if not the most influential of scientists in the modern era in shaping our 
understanding of our place in the universe and how we came to be.
Perhaps Quantum Theory, Quantum Mechanics, could provide that bridge.  There are some very strange 
behaviors that have been witnessed and modeled (and proven by experiment) at the quantum scale, 
principles that defy our notions of space and time that were cemented in the beginning of the twentieth 
century by Einstein and others.  For if there were gods or heroes in our culture today, they were the 
Einsteins, Bohrs, Heisenbergs and Hawkings of our time that defined our reality and determined what the 
next generation of minds were taught, those that broke open the mysteries of the universe with their minds 
and helped us better understand the world we live in.  Or did they?
Even after the continued refinement and experimental evidence that supported Quantum Mechanics 
however, there did arise some significant resistance to the completeness of the theory itself, or at least 
questions as to its true implications with respect to Relativity and Newtonian Mechanics.  The most notable 
of these criticisms came from Einstein himself, most infamously encapsulated in a paper he co-authored and 
published in 1936 with two of his colleagues Boris Podolsky and Nathan Rosen which came to be known 
simply as the EPR Paper, or simply the EPR Paradox, which called attention to what they saw as the 
underlying inconsistencies of Quantum Theory, its completeness, that still required explanation.  In this 
paper, they extended some of the quantum theoretical models to different thought experiments and 
scenarios to yield what they considered to be at very least improbable, if not impossible, conclusions.
They postulated that given the formulas and mathematical models that described the current state of 
Quantum Mechanics, i.e. the description of a wavefunction that described the probabilistic outcomes for a 
given subatomic system, that if such a system were transformed into two separate systems, split apart if you 
will, by definition both systems would then be governed by the same wavefunction and whose subsequent 
behavior and state would be related, no matter what their separation was in spacetime, violating one of the 
core tenets of classically physics, namely communication faster than the speed of light.  At the time, this 
theoretical result was proven mathematically, although it was not actually proven experimentally until much 
later.  
They went on to show that if this was true, it implies that if you have a single particle system that is split into 
two separate particles and subsequently measured, these two now separate and distinct particles would then 
be governed by the same wavefunction, and in turn would be governed by the same uncertainty principle put 
forth by Heisenberg; namely that a defined measurement of a particle in system A will cause its conjugate 
value in system B to be undeterminable or correlated, entangled, even if the two systems had no "physical" 
contact with each other and were light years apart from each other, the so-called measurement problem.

But hold on a second, how could this be possible?  How could you have two separate physical systems, that 
were governed by the same wavefunction, or behavioral equation so to speak, that no matter how far apart 
they were, or no matter how much time elapsed between measurements, that you had a measurement in 
one system which fundamentally correlated with (or uncorrelated with, the argument is the same) a 
measurement in the other system that it was physically separate from beyond the limits established by 
Relativity?  They basically took the wavefunction theory, which governs behavior of quantized particles, and 
its corresponding implication of uncertainty as outlined by Heisenberg's uncertainty principle, and extended 
it to multiple, associated and related subatomic systems, related and governed by the same wavefunction 
despite their separation in space (and time) yielding a very awkward and somewhat unexplainable result, at 
least unexplainable in terms of Classical Mechanics.  
The question they raised boiled down to, how could you have two unrelated, distant systems whose 
measurements or underlying structure depended upon each other in a very well defined and mathematically 
and (theoretically at the time but subsequently verified via experiment) empirically measurable way?  Does 
that imply that these systems are communicating in some way either explicitly or implicitly?  If so that would 
seem to call into question the principle of the fixed speed of light that was core to Relativity Theory.  The 
other alternative option seemed to be that the theory was incomplete in some way, which was Einstein's 
view.  Were there "hidden", yet to be discovered variables that governed the behavior of quantum systems 
that had yet to be discovered, what came to be known in the literature as hidden variable theories?
If it were true, and in the past half century or so many experiments have verified this theoretical postulate, it 
is at the very least extremely odd behavior, or perhaps better put reflected very odd characteristics, 
characteristics certainly inconsistent with prevailing theories of what has come to be known as Classical 
Mechanics (Classical Mechanics now viewed in contrast to Quantum Mechanics which in no small measure 
due to the EPR Paradox has been proven to be inconsistent with Classical Mechanics at a very basic level).  Or 
perhaps better put, inconsistent with the underlying assumptions with respect to how "reality" had been 
described and understood.  
Are these two subsystems, once correlated, communicating with each other?  Is there some information that 
is being passed between them that violates the speed of light boundary that forms the cornerstone of 
modern, Classical Mechanics?  This seems unlikely, and most certainly is something that Einstein felt 
uncomfortable with.  This "spooky action at a distance", which is what Einstein referred to it as, seemed 
literally to defy the laws of Physics.  But the alternative appeared to be that this notion of what we consider 
to be "real", at least as it was classically defined, would need to be significantly modified in some way to take 
into account this correlated behavior between particles or systems that were physically separated beyond 
classical boundaries.  
From Einstein's perspective, two possible explanations for this behavior were put forth, 1) either there 
existed some model of behavior of the interacting systems/particles that was still yet undiscovered, what 
came to be known in the physics community as hidden variables, or 2) the notion of locality, or perhaps more 
aptly put as the tenet of local determinism which Einstein and others associated directly and unequivocally 
with "reality" and was a core assumption to Classical Mechanics as a whole, had to be drastically modified if 
not completely abandoned.  
In Einstein's words however, the language for the first alternative that he seemed to prefer was not that 
there were hidden variables per se, but more so that Quantum Theory as it stood in the first half of the 
twentieth century was incomplete.  That is to say that some variable, coefficient or hidden force was missing 
from the underlying mathematical models of Quantum Mechanics which accounted for not only the lack of 
determinism inherent in the mathematics itself as represented by the wavefunction and the notion of 
"collapse" at the moment of observation, but also explained the correlated "behavior", or correlated 
measurements as it were, of these once bound but then physically separate particles that were separate 
beyond classical means of communication in any way but still nonetheless correlated to each other from a 
measurement perspective.  For Einstein it was the completeness option that he preferred, unwilling to 
consider the idea that the notion of locality was not absolute.  
Ironically enough, hindsight being twenty-twenty and all, Einstein had just revolutionized Classical Mechanics 
with Relativity Theory by postulating that there was no such thing as absolute truth, or absolute reality, on 
the macroscopic and cosmic physical plane so one might be inclined to think that he would have been more 
open to relaxing this requirement of absolutely defined reality in the quantum realm, but apparently not, 
speaking to the complexities and subtleties of the implications of Quantum Theory as well as the strength of 
conviction within the Physics community for locality and determinism and basic underlying principles of 
Physics.

Probably the most widely known metaphor that illustrated Einstein and other's problems with the theoretical 
implications of Quantum Theory is the thought experiment, or paradox as it is sometimes referred to as, 
called Schrödinger's cat, or Schrödinger's cat paradox.   In this thought experiment, which according to 
tradition emerged out of discussions between Schrödinger and Einstein just after the EPR Paper was 
published, a cat is placed in a fully sealed and fully enclosed box with a radioactive source subject to certain 
measurable and quantifiable rate of decay, a rate that is presumably less than the life time of a cat.  In the 
box with the cat is one internal radioactive monitor which measures if there exist any radioactive particles in 
the box (any number >= 1), along with a flask of poison that is triggered by the radioactivity monitor if it is 
triggered.  According to Quantum Theory, which governs the rate of radioactive decay with some random 
probability distribution over time, it is impossible to say at any given moment, until the box is opened in fact, 
whether or not the cat is dead or alive.  The implication here that the cat is in an undefined state until the 
box is opened, implying of course that there is nothing definitive that we can say about the state of the cat 
independent of actually opening the box.  

 
Figure 35: Illustration of Schrödinger's Cat paradox. 

This calls into question, bringing the analogy to the macroscopic or realistic level, whether or not according to 
Quantum Theory reality can be defined independent of observation (or measurement) within the context of 
the cat, the box and the radioactive particle and its associated monitor.  Or of course taken to the logical next 
step, if Quantum Mechanics does accurately represent the substratum of physical reality, can reality itself at 
any level be fully determined independent of observation.  
Now although this all might seem to be simply a philosophical problem, with no real bearing on physics 
proper, the theoretical and metaphysical implications of this, if it is in fact true, are quite profound.  It means 
that if Quantum Mechanics is held to be true, and if the physical world around us is governed by Quantum 
Theory at a basic level, then the idea that reality has an existence outside of any act of measurement or 
observation must be abandoned.  This represents a bit of a problem to the Physics community at large, as 
reflected in the widespread adoption and unwavering belief in Classical Mechanics, as put forth initially by 
Newton and enhanced and expanded upon by Einstein, which relies quite firmly on this assumption of local 
realism, i.e. the notion that physical reality has a state that is fully determined and quantifiable independent 
of any observer or act of observation.
In the course of developing this experiment, Schrödinger coined the term entanglement , which is at some 
level is a re-factoring or rewording of Heisenberg's uncertainty principle but taken to the next theoretical 
implicative step.  To Schrödinger however, this concept of entanglement was the defining characteristic of 
Quantum Mechanics that made it fundamentally incompatible with Classical Mechanics.  Schrödinger himself 
is probably the best person to turn to understand what he meant by entanglement and he describes it thus:

When two systems, of which we know the states by their respective representatives, enter into temporary 
physical interaction due to known forces between them, and when after a time of mutual influence the systems 
separate again, then they can no longer be described in the same way as before, viz. by endowing each of them 
with a representative of its own.  I would not call that one but rather the characteristic trait of quantum 
mechanics, the one that enforces its entire departure from classical lines of thought.  By the interaction the two 
representatives [the quantum states] have become entangled. 

The principle of entanglement, which again has been proven to be verifiably true now via a variety of 
experiments, calls directly into question of what is known as local realism - local in the sense that all the 
behaviors and datum of a given system are determined by the qualities or attributes of only those objects 
within that given system which is bounded by spacetime or some force that is acting upon said system as 
defined by Newtonian Mechanics and Relativity, and real in the sense that the system itself exists 
independent of observation or apparatus/elements of observation.
Taking the non-local theory explanation to the extreme, and something which has promoted quite a bit of 
what can reasonably be called hysterical reaction in some academic and pseudo-academic communities even 
to this day, is that the existence of proven correlation of two pairs of entities that are separated in spacetime 
far enough from each other so that the speed of light boundary could not be crossed - if the two separated 
particles do indeed seem to hold a distinct and mathematically predictable correlation, i.e. are truly 
entangled - then all of Classical Mechanics is called into question since this could only be possible if these two 
separate systems communicated with each other faster than the speed of light which is of course a core 
tenet upon which all of Classical Mechanical models of the universe rest.  Einstein specifically called out these 
spooky action at a distance theories as defunct, he so believed in the invariable tenets of Relativity, and it's 
hard to argue with his position quite frankly because correlation does not necessarily imply communication.  
But if local realism and its underlying tenets of determinism are to be held fast to, then where does that leave 
Quantum Theory and how are its conclusions to be reconciled with Relativity and Newtonian Mechanics?
This problem gets somewhat more crystalized, or well defined, when the physicist John Stewart Bell (1928-
1990) publishes in 1964 a paper entitled On the Einstein Podolsky Rosen Paradox.  In this paper Bell takes the 
EPR Paradox argument one step further and asserts, proves mathematically via a reductio ad absurdum 
argument in fact, that if Quantum Theory is true, that in fact no hidden variable theory could possibly exist 
that reproduces all of the predictions of Quantum Mechanics and is also consistent with locality.  In other 
words, Bell asserted that the hidden variable hypothesis, or at the very least a broad category of hidden 
variable hypotheses, were fundamentally incompatible with Quantum Theory itself, unless the notion of 
locality was abandoned or at least relaxed to some extent.  In his own words:

In a theory in which parameters are added to quantum mechanics to determine the results of individual 
measurements, without changing the statistical predictions, there must be a mechanism whereby the setting of 
one measuring device can influence the reading of another instrument, however remote.  Moreover, the signal 
involved must propagate instantaneously, so that a theory could not be Lorentz invariant. 

Lorentz invariance is a key tenet and assumption of Relativity Theory and basically states that experimental 
results in Classical Mechanics are independent of any movement of a laboratory, or system state boundaries 
of a given experiment, in spacetime.  What Bell is saying here essentially is that even if hidden variables were 
added to Quantum Theory, there still must be present some form of communication, or correlation, between 
these two separate but correlated systems that violates the boundaries of light speed communication as laid 
out by Classical Mechanics.  More specifically what he's saying is that if you have assume hidden variables as 
the answer to Quantum Theories completeness problem, then you needed to abandon at the very least the 
Lorentz invariance assumption, which again basically restates that Quantum Mechanics and Classical 
Mechanics are incompatible at a very basic level.
This assertion came to be known as Bell's Theorem and at its core posits, proves to a large extent, that 
Quantum Mechanics and the concept of locality, which again states that an object is influenced directly only 
by its immediate surroundings bounded by spacetime constraints set by Classical Mechanics and is a 
cornerstone of the theories of Newton and Einstein regarding the behavior of matter and the objective world 
in toto, are mathematically incompatible and inconsistent with each other, providing further impetus as it 
were, that this classical notion of locality was in need of closer inspection, modification or perhaps even 
abandoned entirely. 
Criticisms of Bell's Theorem and the related experiments aside however, if you believe Quantum Theory, and 
you'd be hard pressed not to at this point, you must conclude that the theory violates and is inconsistent 
with Relativity in some way, a rather disconcerting and problematic conclusion for the twentieth century 
physicist to say the least and a problem which plagues, and motivates, much of the research in Theoretical 
Physics to this day, all centered around trying to bridge the theoretical gap between the mathematical and 
theoretical models that govern the behavior of bodies or objects at the macro and cosmic scale, i.e. Relativity 
Theory, and the mathematical and theoretical models that govern the behavior of "things" at the subatomic 
scale, i.e. Quantum Theory.
If you stop and think about it for a second, this subatomic world and how it is now understood to behave 
represents a radical departure from how we typically perceive the world around us on a human and macro, 
and even cosmic, scale.  People walk down the street, taking one step after the other.  People get on planes 
and travel from one side of the country to the other, one side of the world to the other in a matter of hours.  
In all of these movements, our trajectories and paths are mapped conceptually through a continuum of 
states and values represented by a reality of space and time that have been mapped out for us over the last 
two thousand years by philosophers, mathematicians, scientists and physicists such Euclid, Minkowski, 
Descartes, and Einstein among others.  We think of the world as the interaction between independent bodies 
and objects that act and react to each other via the means of external forces.  This isn't just a physics idea, 
these very basic principles are hammered into our heads from an early age and represent the intellectual 
paradigm within which we eat, breathe, sleep and interact with the world, and people, around us.    
The quantum realm, which is the substratum of reality within which all physical objects, animate or 
inanimate, "exist" does not behave according to the same laws or principles however, it is a non-continuous 
world that moves with bursts of energy and discrete changes of state, constantly emitting energy, a world 
that is very different that the one we normally perceive and conceptualize in our day to day lives.  These 
bursts of energy, changes in quantum state, can be very accurately mathematically modeled and predicted 
from a statistical point of view, but do not obey classically deterministic behavioral models and exhibit 
strange properties like entanglement and uncertainty.  These revolutionary ideas advanced by de Broglie, 
Max Planck, Schrödinger, Bohr and Einstein in the first half of the 20th century have had a profound impact on 
scientific thought and our perception of reality itself and their import cannot be understated.  At some level, 
it has changed the entire way we think about the world, at least the subatomic world, and it has presented a 
whole host of theoretical challenges that are yet to be resolved, or fully integrated, even today.
Quantum Theory then, as expressed with Bell's Theorem, Heisenberg's uncertainty principle and this idea of 
entanglement, asserts that there exists a level of interconnectedness between physically disparate systems 
that defies at least some level the Classical Mechanics notion of deterministic locality, pointing to either the 
incompleteness of Quantum Theory or to the requirement of some sort of non-trivial modification or 
relaxation of the assumption of local realism which has underpinned Classical Mechanics for the last few 
centuries if not longer.  
In other words, the implications of Quantum Theory, a theory which has been proven over and over again 
and has very strong predictive power (stochastically speaking) and underlies much of the technological 
advancement of the modern era, is that there is something else is at work that connects the state of particles 
or things at the subatomic scale that we even to this day struggle to explain.  Einstein himself struggles with 
this notion, and its profound implications, even toward the end of his life in 1954 when he says: 

...The following idea characterizes the relative independence of objects far apart in space, A and B: external 
influence on A has no direct influence on B; this is known as the Principle of Local Action, which is used 
consistently only in field theory.  If this axiom were to be completely abolished, the idea of the existence of 
quasienclosed systems, and thereby the postulation of laws which can be checked empirically in the accepted 
sense, would become impossible.... 

There is no question as to the soundness of the mathematics behind Quantum Mechanics and there is now a 
very large body of experimental evidence that supports the underlying theoretical predictions of 
entanglement as well as experimental verification of Bell's Theorem and the EPR Paradox.  What is somewhat 
less clear however, and what arguably may belong more to the world of metaphysics and philosophy rather 
than Physics, is how Quantum Theory is to be interpreted as a representation of reality given the state of 
affairs that it introduces, or perhaps better put the assumptions of local realism that it calls into question.  
What does Quantum Theory tell us about the world we live in, what is its underlying ontology irrespective of 
the soundness of its predictive power?  This is a question that physicists, philosophers and even theologians 
have struggled with since the theory has gained wide acceptance and prominence in the scientific community 
since the 1930s.