
The East-West division with respect to worldviews and ways of thinking clearly has significant limits in 
interpretative utility despite its proliferation and widespread use in the academic and intellectual community, 
in the West in particular.  Having said that it is fair to say that the "Western worldview" is perhaps best 
characterized by reductionism and an almost obsessive focus on the that which can be "known" which rests 
on fundamentally materialistic and deterministic assumptions, i.e. what we call in modern philosophical 
circles as empiricism, which in turn sit upon on a fundamental belief in the supremacy of the physical world 
over the mental or theological world, and rest primarily on rules of logic and reason, and causality, as the 
principle tenets for how reality itself is defined.  The East in contrast can be said to view the world much 
more holistically, or perhaps better put has inherent in it a more comprehensive and expansive view of reality 
as the manifestation of phenomena, which includes the psychological domain from which deeper meanings 
of reality can be grasped as much as they are graspable intellectually.  
While any definition excludes certain criteria that may be of value in the domain being discussed, this 
delineation, definition and distinction of worldviews serves as well as any other with respect to drawing the 
lines between the two ends of the intellectual spectrum as it were of modern thought, a distinction that 
clearly goes beyond any geographical boundary at this point, but one which nonetheless has significant 
implications on how "reality" is defined and perceived.  This contrast in modes of thinking about the world 
around us today in many respects resembles the metaphysical debates that arose between Plato and 
Aristotle in the Hellenic world in the 4th century BCE which provided the metaphysical and intellectual basis 
for the development of all of Hellenic philosophy for some thousand years.  To Plato, forms (eidôs), or ideas 
(ιδέες), were the fundamental building blocks of reality.  With Aristotle, this solution was inadequate or 
incomplete.  To Aristotle, reality primarily consisted of substance, but also rested on the notion of form, 
albeit in the context of Aristotle's ontology, form played a much less significant role than it did in Plato's.  
In Aristotle's philosophy, the known universe consisted of things, or more accurately beings, that were 
primarily defined by the notion of substantial form, a hylomorphic construct where being, or substance 
(ousia) is a compound of matter as well as its underlying form.  This he combined with a fairly comprehensive 
view of causality, which included all of the physical as well as mental aspects of a "thing" which underlie its 
"existence", purpose being included as one of the components of causality.  Aristotle's theory of existence, 
his being qua being, eventually evolved to provide the intellectual basis of causal determinism which 
underlies modern Science (Physics) as we understand it today. 
To Plato the forms, shapes or ideas, which manifested, were required even, to produce and define what we 
think of as "physical reality" so to speak were ontologically superior to the physical things themselves.  These 
physical "things" could not exist, would have no definition or existence at all, without the underlying forms 
which made them what they are.  This is essentially Plato's theory of forms as we have come to understand it 
today, as perhaps best illustrated in his Allegory of the Cave story in the Republic where individuals are 
chained to the floor in a cave with a roaring fire in back of them that they cannot see, mistaking the shadows 
that are displayed on the wall in front of them which are merely reflections of objects passing behind them 
but in front of the fire as "real" things, having no knowledge of true objective reality until and unless they are 
"released" from their bondage and led up onto land where the sun reigns supreme and true physical reality is 
shown to them in all its glory. 
Aristotle's view eventually won out of course in the West from an intellectual perspective but Plato's idealism 
persists in religious, really theological, and (some) philosophical intellectual circles, as juxtaposed with the 
fundamental tenets of say science, physics, and biology - the modern pillars of science.  We now however live 
in a world permeated by East/West synthesis and interaction and we can find many of the hallmarks of that 
ancient debate present within the scientific, philosophical and religious communities throughout the world 
today - for example the Creationists versus the Evolutionists where strict interpretative lenses are applied to 
ancient myths which clearly were crafted before any notion of modern science even existed.
Even though culturally speaking this East-West divide may no longer have any geographical boundary upon 
which it rests given how international a community we live in now, it does nonetheless reflect the division 
between contrasting worldviews that can be loosely aligned with the "scientific" versus "spiritual" worldview 
- i.e. the worlds of Science and Religion respectively.  Perhaps another look may reveal that the two 
approaches need not sit in contrast with one another however, and if integrated into a larger whole can be 
looked at as two sides of the same coin.  But what is missed by most it would appear is that there is no right 
or wrong worldview but in fact that the coin simply has two sides - speaking quite directly to the deeper 
knowledge that may rest in the power of the Yīn-Yáng intellectual framework, the integration and balancing 
of opposites, within which reality is viewed, at least in antiquity, in the Far East.   
One way to classify and distinguish between the Western and Eastern worldviews, contrasting them from a 
cosmological and physical universe perspective, is that of a 'closed', or 'bound' view of physical reality versus 
an 'open', 'cyclical' or 'process' based reality.  The former view is a hallmark of Western cosmological 
mythology and has continued to be a hallmark of Western intellectual development ever since.  It permeates 
Western philosophical inquiry to a large extent and continues to be one of the defining characteristics of 
Western thought even today.  Scientific development, from its first method of philosophical inquiry by the 
ancient Greeks straight through the more modern "Scientific Revolution" and even into the modern 
"Quantum" era has looked at the world primarily through a mechanistic and systematic lens, an analysis and 
modeling of these 'closed' systems and how the various components of these well-defined, 'bound' systems 
interact with each other and are described from a phenomenological, i.e. objective realist, perspective.  
Western intellectual developments in this context can be looked at this quest for understanding the 
fundamental and most elemental characteristics of matter and the objective world, and in turn the 
relationships between these objects of perception.  Quantum Theory represents the ultimate end of this line 
of inquiry though, the final boundary upon which the limits of this type of worldview, this idea of 'closed' 
systems of objective reality, can be defined without the aspect of cognition, the role of the observer, 
included in the model per se.  This worldview, while not wrong or incorrect in any way, is primarily physical 
and objective, and leans heavily on the mathematical laws and theories which have been "discovered", which 
govern the behavior of these "things".  All of these things being capable of objective description and whose 
states are ultimately defined by one or more physical, and measurable, properties.  Things that can be said to 
exist within the system in question - be it a set of atomic data within the context of a quantum experiment or 
a set of interplanetary or galactic objects that are viewed within the context of the "known" or "visible" 
universe as a whole - are ultimately defined and "bound" by the underlying mathematical laws as well as the 
measurable qualities or characteristics that these laws are designed to yield.
In fact the boundaries of the entire system itself as defined from a "Western" worldview, is what we call the 
"Universe" or "Cosmos".  This notion is defined as every "thing" that has existed or will exist within this 
physical and objective conception of reality since the beginning of "time".  Time itself, what the Greeks 
referred to as Chronos, is created as part of the cosmological universal order as part of the creation of the 
universe itself.  Time and the Cosmos (kosmos) are in fact co-eternal and co-existent.  While we defer to all of 
the advancements of modern science which point to a single, massive "singularity" which occurred some 13.8 
billion years ago .  This is the universal creation event that we refer to as the Big Bang Theory which marks 
the primordial event after which all cosmological and theoretical physical study is concerned with and 
represents the beginning of not just "time" itself, but also the creation of the physical laws that govern "our" 
universe.  
The very roots of these boundaries of space and time and the cosmos itself can be found in the ancient 
mythological narratives of our predecessors in the West, whether we give credit to our intellectual ancestors 
or not.  In fact, to think beyond these boundaries, before the great singularity event from which our universe 
emerged, or even to look beyond the known (really "visible") universe is not considered even a conceivable 
act of study from a physics or scientific perspective.  Once someone leaves these boundaries, they in effect 
have left the boundaries of (Western) Science itself, and have entered into the realm of philosophical 
speculation or inquiry, i.e. non-empirically testable or verifiable theories or ideas which provide the 
"boundaries" of Science itself.
The view from the East however - as seen through the eyes of Vedānta, Buddhism and Chinese philosophy for 
example - can be characterized as "cyclical", "process-oriented" or "open".  Open in the sense that the 
universe itself is not considered to have a beginning per se, but is believed to be eternally existent and always 
and forever manifesting as an "experiential" event that is not simply defined by the definition of physical 
objects which exist in time and space, but is a constant unfolding of "experience" which cognitive beings 
partake in and ultimately provide the basis for any understanding of "it" -  it being "reality".  This distinctive 
characteristic of the East is evident in the Hindu belief in the cycles or "Ages", or Yugas,  of time that defines 
the cosmological worldview of the Hindus (and was embedded in early Greco-Roman mythos as well in fact), 
and is reflected - from an anthropomorphic and mythical perspective - by the inbreathing and outbreathing 
of Brahman.  
In the "East", speculation about the universal order of things and our place in it is viewed within this cyclical, 
or "unbound" context, not within a set physical boundary in time or space per se.  This is why attempts to 
classify the ancient mythos of the Chinese almost defy definition from a Western intellectual perspective.  
The idea of "Cosmos" in fact, as defined by the boundaries of space and time within which the physical 
universe that we live in was "created" and will ultimately be "destroyed", does not exist.  Their view, most 
predominantly reflected in the Yìjīng, is one of a continuing process of becoming and change within which 
any sort of meaning, meaning which fundamentally includes and synthesizes not just the "person" who is 
looking for this meaning, but also the underlying socio-political context within which this individual "co-
exists".  The physical aspect of the universe is not, and effectively cannot, be distinguished from the "being" 
who is participating in the continual process of change and becoming which is constantly unfolding.  This is 
what we mean by an "open", or essentially "unbound" worldview.  
In order to find this source of this "closed" view of the West, this almost obsession to break things apart and 
drill further and further into the constituent components of a thing until once can literally go no further, one 
needs to reach back to the beginning of development of thought, and language, in the West.  To the ancient 
Greeks who laid down the intellectual foundations - linguistic, metaphysical and otherwise - that we have 
inherited in the West through language and culture down through the ages.  One can look at the beginning of 
this "bound" and "closed" systemic view of the world as having its roots in Pythagorean philosophy, a 
philosophy that as we understand it rested on the harmony and eternal co-existence of numbers and their 
relationship to each other, forming the underlying ground of all existence.  It is from the Pythagorean 
tradition as we understand it, that Plato's fascination with geometry - as reflected most readily in perhaps his 
most lasting and influential dialogues the Timaeus - was founded.   
To truly understand the context, source and origins of Western thought, we must of course reach back to 
classical Greek philosophical development, from which our definition of philosophy in the West rests, we 
must first understand the intellectual (and socio-political) context within which these great and lasting 
influential thinkers emerged, and how and why this transition from mythic poetry and divine worship as the 
primary source of knowledge becomes relegated and subservient to philosophy, a term first coined by 
Pythagoras in fact according to historical tradition.  By philosophy here, we again use a primarily Western 
definition which is almost recursively defined as the purely rational and intellectual pursuit of knowledge 
itself as reflected in the classic philosophical tradition within which these intellectual developments evolved.  
Philosophy in this context can also be defined more specifically and literally being by looking at the meaning 
of the word itself in Greek from which it is derived, i.e. the "love" or "study of" "knowledge" or "wisdom", i.e. 
sophia. 
While the intellectual and academic tradition has typically divided philosophical and theological development 
into "Western" and "Eastern" branches, some scholars have challenged this classical distinction, in particular 
in the last few decades as linguistic, genetic and archeological evidence has pointed to a more complex and 
interwoven evolution that took place in the Mediterranean, Near East and Indian subcontinent in classical 
antiquity.  In this region, starting in the latter part of the 4th millennium BCE or so, we find evidence for 
perhaps the greatest invention in mankind's history - namely writing.  
At this juncture in human history we find not only the beginnings of hieroglyphic script in Northern Africa 
(Egypt) from this time but also the introduction of cuneiform script in the Near East (Mesopotamia).  Both 
systems no doubt started as pictograms and logograms, symbols that represented abstract thoughts or ideas, 
but each eventually evolved into more complex writing systems that contained what linguists refer to as 
morphemes, graphemes and phonemes, essentially smaller units of meaning which came to represent sounds 
and words alongside symbols and ideas.  It is this development more so than any other that ushered in the 
era of human evolution that is characterized by advanced abstract thought, an invention that was arguably 
not only required in order to support advanced civilization in the respective cultures within which it evolved, 
but also at the same time supported and underpinned said developments.  
For as we find evidence for these various systems of writing and they became more prevalent and 
widespread, the civilizations that utilized this invention at the same time became more urbanized and 
specialized, allowing and supporting the establishment of a "priestly" or "scholarly" class of individuals that 
eventually formed the social and intellectual basis for not just trade and commerce, but eventually the basis 
for all theo-philosophical development as well, even if we do not find true "philosophical" works form these 
regions until the first millennium BCE or so.  Necessity is indeed the mother of invention and writing is 
certainly no exception to this universal rule.
These writing systems had to adapt and evolve to support not just barter and trade (basic mathematics), but 
also contracts and agreements between individuals and states, as well as - and this is perhaps a later 
development (3rd and 2nd millennium BCE) to codify and capture various rituals and ceremonies which had 
been established to appease the gods, a shared cultural and theological phenomenon that we find all through 
Eurasia in antiquity in fact.  [Egyptian hieroglyphs associated with burial grounds (Pyramid Texts), cuneiform 
tablets with various myths and tales of the gods (the Enûma Eliš), the divination tools and symbols developed 
by the ancient Chinese (the Zhōu Yì), the Indo-Aryan Vedas and the Indo-Iranian Avesta literature, etc.].
Another core characteristic of these ancient writing systems is that given that many different languages were 
spoken even in the specific geographic regions themselves (the Near East/Persia, North Africa and Egypt, 
ancient China, etc.), these writing systems had to evolve to support all of these different (spoken) languages 
as well.  It is this feature, this requirement as it were, that in no small measure drove the evolution of these 
first archaic hieroglyphic and pictogram writing systems into their more modern alphabetic form.  For 
example, we have evidence that cuneiform in particular was adapted to support a wide variety of ancient 
languages of the Middle and Near East such as Akkadian, Elamite, Hittite, and Hurrian among others, 
languages from both the Afroasiatic branch of the linguistic tree as well as languages from the Indo-European 
branch. 
It is with cuneiform script that we find then - via its direct descendant writing system referred to as the 
Phoenician alphabet for which we find evidence in the first half of the first millennium BCE - what is 
commonly held to be the parent writing system of virtually all the alphabetic systems of writing in antiquity 
that were used not only throughout the Mediterranean but also in the Middle and Near East as well as the 
Indian subcontinent.  For the Phoenician alphabet is held to be not only the parent system of the ancient 
Greek alphabet (and in turn Latin of course which evolved from a form of the Greek alphabet), but also the 
ancient Aramaic alphabet from which ancient Hebrew alphabet is believed to have derived, Pahlavi which is 
the script used to write many of the ancient Iranian and Persian languages (e.g. the Avesta), and even the 
various forms of the Brāhmī alphabetic script that we find in use throughout South and Central Asia in the 
latter part of the first millennium BCE which, in its various descendant forms, is the script used for the 
transcription of the ancient Sanskrit Vedic literature. 
So again in the West, which includes in this context the Indian subcontinent which we have shown reflects 
the "Indo-European" theo-philosophical mindset more or less, we can actual follow the progression in 
written history of this transition from more archaic and pre-historical forms of divine worship, i.e. mythos, to 
the practice and discipline of philosophy as a practical art upon which the rational foundations of ethics, 
morality, and the common good rest, i.e. Logos.  In the Hellenic world, which is what modern historians and 
academics look to as the basic building blocks of "Western" thought, this transition takes place in the first 
half of the first millennium BCE from the time of Homer and Hesiod, through the developments of the so-
called "Pre-Socratics" (as we understand their views primarily through fragments from later authors and 
interpreters of their beliefs) and ultimately to the works of Plato and Aristotle which form the basis of 
Hellenic philosophy in all its forms.
It is then with this historical and evolutionary context in mind, we can see how it is that the Hellenic 
philosophical tradition has come to be so representative of "Western" thought, one which is characterized by 
the study and analysis of reality as a series of bound or closed systems in time and space and one which even 
God himself is seen as bound within said intellectual framework.  He is the Creator.  Prior to creation, God 
himself does not exist in fact.  It is this intellectual framework which not only ultimately leads to the 
establishment of Science in the modern era, but also one which provides the rational underpinnings for 
theology, i.e. Religion, as well - as the both the early Christian Church Fathers as well as the early 
Islamic/Arabic philosophers (falṣafa), all appealed to the Hellenic philosophy in one form or another to 
provide a rational foundation for their theological views.  
It was not until the Scientific Revolution some 1500 years later that intellectual thought breaks free of 
religious dogma, and while the basic principles laid down by the ancient Greeks which established the Truth 
of the Biblical narrative were for the most part altogether abandoned, at least from a physics perspective, 
later philosophers and the first scientists in fact remained nonetheless convinced of the underlying geometric 
foundation of the universe as the ultimate expression of God.  None of these great thinkers were atheists in 
any sense of the word and although they may have rejected most, if not all of the basic tenets of the Church, 
especially with respect to Creation mythology as laid out in Genesis (at least from a literal standpoint), the 
still held onto the firm belief that mathematics, and in turn geometry, represented the ultimate and best 
expression of the divine in the material world.
Even to the Enlightenment Era philosophers, mathematics and geometry were the core basic building blocks 
of universe from which our natural world can be understood.  Newton rested his grand three laws of motion, 
which underpin Classical Mechanics even today, upon Euclidean geometry which described physical space in 
terms of spatial coordinates on a three dimensional plane as well as their movement through time via a new 
method of mathematics called calculus which facilitates the calculation of the rates of change of objects and 
the slope of their respective curves in Euclidean three dimensional space (differential calculus) as well as the 
calculation of the areas under and between these curvatures (integral calculus).  Using these tools, along with 
his universal law of gravitation, Newton was able to more accurately predict the orbits of the planets around 
the sun - as first put forth by Copernicus - as well as establish the firm mathematical, and of course 
fundamental geometrical, ground for Physics which is still taught in schools today.  This system that he 
created, which rested on his three laws of motion that described the interaction between objects within 
Euclidean geometrical space, were the cornerstones of Physics until the twentieth century when Einstein 
upended Physics with his Theory of Relativity.  
Relativity, as Einstein "discovered" it, expands upon the three dimensional notion of space put forth first by 
Euclid and leveraged by Newton, and established a new geometrical fabric of reality based upon the notion of 
curved spacetime, fully integrating gravity into the geometrical framework (as the bending, or curvature of 
spacetime) rather than it being described as an external "force" acting on objects across space and time as 
Newton did.  Einstein was required to create - or perhaps better stated "borrow" - a new and more complex 
geometrical framework within which the fabric of spacetime, its underlying curvature, as well as the objects 
moving within it could be described.  It is within the framework of General Relativity that his famed 
equivalence of mass and energy is yielded (E = mc2), where the overall system is bound by, and 
fundamentally constrained by, the constant limit of the speed of light no matter what an observer's frame of 
reference is.   
Quantum Mechanics is no exception either.  Despite the theory calling into question our basic understanding 
of what an "object" truly is and how it can be defined independent of its "environment", calling into question 
our basic conception of objective reality in and of itself, a new geometrical framework needed to be 
established in order to describe the movement of these so-called objects, or "particles", at the sub-atomic 
scale, i.e. Hilbert space, a generalization of Euclidean space which extends vector algebra and calculus to 
support any number (an infinite number in fact) of "spatial" dimensions.  But of course, the underlying 
geometry of Quantum Mechanics, despite its predictive power, comes with its some very intriguing and 
"mysterious" mathematical certainties which call into question some of the foundational principles of 
Classical Mechanics, mainly the notion of locality as it relates to objective phenomena.  
Leaving aside the fundamental inconsistencies and philosophical questions that Quantum Mechanics poses to 
the underlying assumptions and beliefs that underpin Classical Mechanics (in particular with respect to the 
notions of causal objective determinism and objective realism and its sister principle locality), regardless both 
"physical" models are understood and described within the context of bound, closed intellectual frameworks 
and systems.  In other words, each model of reality - both Newtonian Mechanics as well its more abstract 
cousin which includes the notion of gravity, i.e. General Relativity, as well as Quantum Theory - describes 
reality as a physical system which includes objects, things, which interact with each other and exist and are 
describable within specific quantifiable and measurable physical states at specific moments in the spacetime 
continuum.  Furthermore, these models have the power to predict the behavior, or future states, of these 
various things or objects using various sophisticated geometrical models and equations that in toto, with 
known starting variables such as positon, momentum/velocity, mass, etc., can predict the movement of the 
these objects through the Euclidean geometrical space within which these objects are said to exist via the use 
of sophisticated mathematical calculations and equations that operate on, and yield results within, these 
complex geometrical structures which are presumed to "represent" reality.  
This is essentially the power of modern science, the ability to predict future states of phenomena given a set 
of starting variables, all measured and quantified within the context of an observer.  What's lost in all of this 
power and complex mathematics however is that it all rests upon a very specific set of assumptions and 
principles regarding reality itself, i.e. the mathematics and related theories bound the definition of reality - 
what in philosophical circles they call ontology.  Such is the reason now doubt that many of the greatest 
minds of the twentieth century who understood Quantum Theory better than any of us refused to enter into 
any metaphysical interpolation of the theory itself, not just on philosophical grounds but on basic 
mathematical grounds - in short calling into question the ability for mathematics, and of course geometry to 
which it is intrinsically related, to provide and sort of meaning to reality from a philosophical and 
metaphysical perspective.
Such is the nature of Physics as it stands today, both when studied at the grand scale as governed by the laws 
of General Relativity "discovered" by Einstein as well as Quantum Mechanics, as put forth and articulated by 
the likes of Bohr, Heisenberg, Schrödinger, de Broglie and others in the twentieth century.  Nonetheless this 
undying and unfailing belief that the natural world is best understood through the lens of mathematical laws 
and formulas which govern the various states and relationships of the "physical" world as it moves through a 
specifically described and formulated geometric continuum, reality in fact as we have defined it, is a belief 
shared by and first promulgated by the ancient philosophers from the Mediterranean starting with 
Democritus, Pythagoras, Plato and Aristotle among others and has carried forward into the 21st century.  The 
problem comes when, to borrow a phrase from Robert Pirsig, we confuse the map with the territory.