
If one believes in the power of mathematics to describe the universe, as the language of God so to speak, a 
notion which underpins all of Physics in the post Enlightenment Era as reflected in the two pillars of modern 
Physics, namely Relativity Theory and Quantum Theory, each of which has proven to have tremendously 
powerful predictive power for the explanation of measurement phenomena at the macrocosmic and 
microcosmic (subatomic) level of the "physical world" respectively, one is forced to radically change one's 
perspective on, and fundamental definition of, "reality".  This is not a philosophical conclusion, or a 
theological one for that matter.  This is a rationally deductive conclusion that anyone who understands 
modern Physics must arrive at if they follow the math.  The two theories are fundamentally incompatible in 
the sense that they rest on fundamentally incompatible assumptions that have been proven to be 
mathematically true and again have been empirically verified.  Most Physicists punt on the problem.  They 
say that the math is a tool to predict the behavior of measurable phenomena in their respective domains and 
that any interpretation of what the math "means" or "says" about the nature of reality is a problem for 
philosophers of science, and in effect outside the domain of pure "science".  
The author takes issue with this type of interpretation however, even though it is the "standard" and 
"orthodox" view offered by Physicists and is most certainly the viewpoint offered by virtually every major 
textbook on Physics which is used to teach all modern students about science in the West.  This conclusion, 
which the author deems is inescapable, in turn forces an expansion and redefinition of knowledge itself, one 
which is typically confined and equivalent to conclusions that are drawn by Science, but one which the 
science itself forces us to reconsider, as illustrated by any basic understanding of Quantum Theory as well as 
Relativity Theory, to include and integrate the "observer" as well as the "observed" into some sort of 
cohesive and coherent model.  No matter what model one chooses to adopt, it is one that must sit "above", 
ontologically speaking, any definition that can be offered by Physics or Science as it is understood today, and 
must incorporate some type of metaphysical intellectual system, back to the beginning really to what 
Aristotle called first philosophy, i.e. metaphysics, as the specific domain which must be explored and logically 
and rationally constructed to incorporate these scientific findings into our understanding of reality.
From a pure mathematical perspective, what Quantum Theory tells us is that there exists some sort of basic 
interconnecting principle that explains the behavior and complex relationship of these subatomic "particles" 
as we have come to understand them.  While it would be convenient to categorize and define these strange 
properties and principles of the subatomic realm as the result of some type of "force", i.e. a field of sorts that 
interacts between two separate and distinct "things" or "objects" and results in some sort of correlative 
measurement phenomena that can be described by some sort of mathematical equation that relates the 
"objects" in question, any and all attempts to describe the behavior of the subatomic world in such a way has 
unfortunately completely eluded some of the brightest minds in physics for some 70 years or so.  This in fact 
was the driving force of much of Einstein's work in the latter part of his career, and one which he was 
ultimately unable to solve.  It is intellectual driving force (no pun intended) that underpins the conclusions 
drawn in famed EPR Paper which criticized Quantum Theory as "incomplete" and posited the potential 
existence of so-called hidden variables, which would theoretically bridge the gap between the Quantum 
Theory and Relativity, the existence of which have been albeit entirely ruled out mathematically speaking by 
Bell's Theorem which deals with the potential existence of hidden variables explicitly.  The only exception 
perhaps is Bohmian Mechanics, aka de Broglie-Bohm theory or simply pilot-wave theory (more below), which 
is arguable the best of, if not the only, coherent hidden variable theory that is also fully deterministic that has 
been put forward since Quantum Theory has become widely accepted and empirically verified since the 
middle of the twentieth century or so, since the advent of the Quantum Era.  
Leaving Bohmian Mechanics aside (a theory which has not been widely accepted by modern Physics for a 
variety of reasons and is very difficult for the layperson or non-Physicist to understand and arguably violates 
the principle of Ockham's razor  and is certainly not taught in schools and academia for the most part), our 
notion and definition of reality must in fact adapt and evolve to support the developments of modern 
Science, i.e. Physics, which explain the behavior of macrocosmic phenomena, but also subatomic 
phenomena, the latter of which of course exhibit quite paradoxically both wave like and particle like behavior 
and also at the same time have been shown to exhibit strange properties such as entanglement.  Following 
this rationale to its logical conclusion, if we as human beings (and all animals or physical objects for that 
matter, the entirety of the "animate" and "inanimate" world), both subsist and consist of these elementary 
particles which exhibit these "non-classical" properties, we must in fact expand upon our notion of "reality" 
itself to incorporate these characteristics which have proven to be "scientifically" true.  The author rejects 
the "math is for measurement and predictability only" position as an intellectual cop out of sorts for avoiding 
the albeit difficult problem of offering up a solution to the question of what it all means.  A solution which 
must, by definition, delve into the world of metaphysics at some level or another.  Hence the reason no 
doubt that Physicists are reluctant to wade into these waters.  
And therein lies one of the basic underlying problems this work is trying to address really, that the underlying 
rational for the "its just math" position, that it's a problem for philosophers of Science and not a problem for 
Physics as an academic discipline needs to be revised.    Not only must we come up with a wholesale new 
definition of "reality", but we need to reformulate our approach and definition to knowledge itself, which 
must incorporate what we understand as the basic substratum of existence as characterized by the basic 
characteristics and properties of Quantum Theory as well as Relativity by incorporating and integrating the 
observer and observable phenomena into a more holistic model, or into at least the presentation of 
alternative models which satisfy this very basic requirement.  Hence the essays and subject matter of the last 
part of this work which deal with ontology.  Once this is done, and again the author argues that it must in fact 
be done if we are to move knowledge forward and continue to evolve, intellectually speaking at least, as a 
species, we must ultimately confront what any of these alternative models of reality which incorporate and 
synthesize the notions of the observer and observable phenomena, but also the substratum of existence 
within which this act of perception is continuously taking place, we must then look at what if any conclusions 
can be drawn, regarding the meaning of life, the meaning of existence, its ultimate purpose, what we refer to 
following Aristotle as teleology, and how we as individuals should incorporate said conclusions into our daily 
lives in the Quantum Era which is dominated intellectually, in particular in the West, by objective realism, a 
somewhat unintended byproduct as it were of the Scientific Revolution which provided the intellectual 
platform for twentieth century Physics, i.e. Relativity Theory and Quantum Theory.  Or alternatively, if we 
adopt a materialistic position and we look upon the domain of Physics as we understand it today as simply 
providing mathematical tools to drive innovation and make life "easier" or more "efficient", at least we will 
be "consciously" adopting such positions rather than having them beaten into us by teachers and educators 
for virtually our entire early life. 
So this is the rationale for providing these alternative, more encompassing theories of reality, for delving 
back into first philosophy, i.e. metaphysics, and concluding - just as Aristotle did some 2500 years ago - that 
metaphysics must be understood and covered at length, prior to studying physics, or what he and the 
intellectual and academic community termed natural philosophy up until fairly recently in fact.  And the 
implications of this reversal, or really inversal, of domains of study that we are describing and providing the 
rationale for here have vast and wide-ranging implications not just for Physics and Philosophy, Philosophy in 
this sense being defined quite broadly, but on our view and definition of knowledge itself.  For once we make 
this determination, once we come to this conclusion, the entire definition and discipline of what we call 
"scientific inquiry" must then be broadened to include metaphysics, and in turn - for better or worse - 
theology.  This is precisely the conclusion that Aristotle came to when he attempted to define and describe 
knowledge, or that which can be said to be "known", as reflected by the what he called epistêmê, i.e. 
epistemology, which has been handed down to us through translation as Science.  
In other words, the fact that Physicists for the most part refuse to offer up any answers for us as a society as 
a whole as to what the basic pillars of Physics as we understand them in the modern era mean, or how they 
should be interpreted with respect to our notion of reality, again what we refer to as teleology, does not 
make the problem, or any of the proposed solutions to said problem, "unscientific".  Herein lies the heart of 
one of the underlying theses of this work, i.e. not only should metaphysics be brought back to its place as first 
philosophy, i.e. should be studied "before" Physics (which is where the term metaphysics actually comes 
from, i.e. the reason why Aristotle's treatise Metaphysics was given its title), but that the academic 
community at large should be reformed and should teach metaphysics, i.e. first philosophy, before Physics, or 
even Biology or Chemistry for that matter which were topics covered as part of his natural philosophy.  The 
problem with this of course is that metaphysics and theology are so very closely linked that it's very hard to 
distinguish between the two once you follow any proposed system of metaphysics to its logical conclusion.  
For any system of metaphysics to be complete, must - again as put forth by Aristotle - address the 
underlying "causes"  or "reasons" why some "thing" or some "principle" has been brought into existence.  
The "why" questions, our teleology again, that underlie not just Physics, again natural philosophy, but also 
the individual beings which participate in and are fundamentally integrated with this physical world, 
ontology.  These questions take us quite naturally into the domains of ethics, morality, theology and 
Sociology (political philosophy), all of which again must rest, from a rational and logical perspective, upon 
whatever system of metaphysics we adhere to or adopt.  
This approach of course has the benefit of bringing back as it were, all of the branches of knowledge under a 
single, cohesive and integrated umbrella.  This is one of the primary reasons why Aristotle's philosophy was 
so influential for such a long period in the West, arguably representing the cornerstone and basic foundation 
of "education" in the West for some 2000 years.  His conceptions and definitions of logic, reason and 
metaphysics and even physics and ethics underpinned almost all intellectual thinking more or less, including 
Religion as well, before the system was overhauled and effectively split in two as an unintended byproduct of 
the so-called Scientific Revolution after which Religion and Science have been subsequently become 
completely incompatible.  Incompatible to the point where common and widely held conceptions of these 
two domains is that they rest on two entirely distinctive and almost diametrically opposed principles - one 
called Science, that is entirely objective and is bound by empirically valid and "proven" hypotheses and 
principles, i.e. laws, and another that is based upon "faith" or "belief" and is entirely subjective and is one 
that fundamentally cannot be "proven" empirically or otherwise and is therefore "unscientific".  Taken to the 
extreme, Science is looked upon as "rational" and Religion is looked upon as "irrational".  And this of course 
does not even broach the topic of the potential reality of the so-called "mystical" experience or the nature of 
consciousness itself which is arguably outside of the domains of Science and Religion at this stage of the 
intellectual development of human history, despite the existence of mystical disciplines that have persisted 
and have been written about, and ultimately provide the basis for all Religions, throughout the entirety of 
human history.
So we must therefore, to advance intellectual development as a whole, and for the good of society and the 
environment within which we live in fact, look at and analyze various coherent and cohesive intellectual 
systems, i.e. systems of metaphysics really, which bring together and make sense of these seemingly 
incompatible basic principles that underlie our modern conceptions of physical reality - i.e. that there is some 
non-local underlying attribute of the substratum of existence that manifests itself by the fundamental 
correlative measurement properties of subatomic particles that are separated by distances that cannot be 
traversed within the boundaries of Classical Mechanical assumptions.  This requires us of course to make 
sense of what Quantum Theory actually implies, or means - enter teleology again - and in turn what the 
implications it has on any conception of reality, i.e. ontology, we come up with to explain these basic and 
seemingly incompatible assumptions, and in turn and expansion of the definition of knowledge itself, 
epistemology, to take these factors into account.  Although at first glance the exercise might seem to be a 
purely intellectual one (really a Philosophical one in terms of how this discipline is understood in the modern, 
Quantum Era) the exercise nonetheless has great merit because at the very least it will help elucidate the 
limitations, and the subtle and far reaching implications in fact, of the pure materialistic and objective view of 
reality that prevails in the West today - even if one rejects any of the systems of metaphysics that are put 
forth herein as put forth in antiquity by Aristotle.  
This leads us to questions and topics that fall under the heading of "Interpretations" of Quantum Theory, 
which arguably fall under the category of what is typically referred to as philosophy of science today but 
effectively, as keenly understood by Bohm for example, really are ontological questions - i.e. fall directly 
under the modern Philosophical discipline of ontology, a discipline which studies the nature of reality, or 
technical being, terminology that harkens back to the very origins of Hellenic philosophy.

There are many interpretations of Quantum Theory, i.e. how to make sense of the model with respect to its 
implications regarding the nature of the physical universe, physical reality as it were, but there are three in 
particular that deserve attention due either to their prevalence or acceptance in the academic community, 
i.e. academia, and/or their impact on scientific and/or philosophical community in particular, which in this 
domain really amounts to the Physics community more or less.  The fundamental question underlying these 
varying interpretations of Quantum Theory, what distinguishes them from one another essentially, are 
philosophical in nature - again ontological primarily.  In other words, the fundamental question along which 
the various interpretations of Quantum Theory align, or misalign as the case may be, is what does Quantum 
Theory, given its predictive power, imply about the true nature of physical reality?  We have come to a place 
in Science where we know that the underlying substratum of existence is bound by such mathematically 
proven principles such as uncertainty, complementarity and entanglement, and the implicit connection 
between the observed and the act of observation - all of which fly in the face of our long held beliefs with 
respect to our understanding of Classical Mechanics, i.e. how the world actually "is", calling into question the 
nature of objective reality in and of itself.
On the one hand, we can say that it's just a predictive model, no need to come to any radical conclusions 
about what it implies about the nature of the world we live in, much less any metaphysical, ontological, 
ethical or moral considerations (Copenhagen Interpretation).  On the other hand, we can look at Everett's 
relative-state formulation and conclude that the underlying math tells us that we are all, mathematically 
speaking at least, part of a constantly unfolding universe where the distinction between the observed and the 
observer is not nearly as clearly defined as we have come to think.  But are there any other alternatives that 
give us the opportunity, at least theoretically at least, to hold on to our notions of objective reality that we 
have come to adore and consider to be almost unassailable assumptions about the world we live in?  David 
Bohm, the main architect of what has come to be known as Bohmian Mechanics, offers an alternative 
interpretation of Quantum Theory that falls squarely in this camp.
The first is the so-called "Standard" or "Orthodox" interpretation, the one most often compared to or cited in 
reference to when differing interpretations are put forth and explained and the one presented in the 
majority of text books on the subject.  This is most commonly referred to as the Copenhagen Interpretation 
and it basically renders the theoretical boundaries of interpretation of Quantum Theory to the results of the 
experiment itself and no further.  This point of view can be looked at as a pure mathematical and physical 
behavioral modelling view of Quantum Mechanics and fundamental rejects any philosophical or ontological 
implications.  
The second is definitely a little out there but still nonetheless carries some weight within the academic 
community, the Physics and Mathematics community in particular, and is undoubtedly mathematically and 
theoretically sound, and intellectually interesting, even though its ontological implications are somewhat 
extreme, abstract theoretically mathematical case.  This interpretation has a few variants but is mostly 
referred to in the literature as the many-worlds interpretation, or many-minds, Interpretation and it expands 
upon the theoretical boundaries of Quantum Mechanics by explaining its stochastic nature by proposing the 
existence of multiple universes, or at least multiple possible universes.  
The third interpretation that intellectually is perhaps the most appealing, particularly given its implicit 
ontological and metaphysical underpinnings, and as such is sometimes the Ontological Interpretation of 
Quantum Theory or simply Bohmian Mechanics.  It extends Quantum Mechanics to include a principle it 
refers to as quantum potential, and while it abandons the classical notion of locality it still preserves the 
notion of objective realism and determinism upon which Classical Mechanics is predicated.  
Of these three, the most widely accepted and commonly taught interpretation, the one that is presented in 
textbooks on the subject and is most often used as the standard bearer for alternative interpretations, is the 
Copenhagen Interpretation.  This interpretation is most often associated with Niels Bohr and Werner 
Heisenberg, stemming from their collaboration in Copenhagen in 1927, hence the name.  The term was 
further crystallized in writings by Heisenberg in the 1950s when expressing his views on contradictory 
interpretations of Quantum Theory.  The Copenhagen Interpretation holds that the Quantum Theory does 
not, and cannot, yield a description of any sort of objective reality, i.e. does not have any ontological 
implications, but deals only with sets of probabilistic outcomes of experimental values borne from 
experiments observing or measuring various aspects of energy quanta, entities that do not fit neatly into 
classical interpretations of mechanics.  The underlying tenet here is that the act of measurement itself, the 
observer (or by extension the apparatus of observation) causes the set of probabilistic outcomes to converge 
on a single outcome, a feature of Quantum Mechanics commonly referred to as wavefunction collapse and 
that any additional interpretation of what might actually be going on, i.e. the underlying "reality", defies 
explanation and therefore any interpretation of the model from an ontological or metaphysical perspective is 
in fact intellectually inconsistent with the fundamental mathematical tenets of the theory itself.  
In this interpretation of Quantum Theory, reality - used here in the classical sense of the term as the 
existence of natural phenomenon, i.e. "things", that exist independent of any "act of observation" - is a 
function of the experiment, and is defined as a result of the act of observation and has no ontological or 
metaphysical implications independent of the experiment itself which simply yields some measurement 
value.  In other words, reality in the quantum world from this point of view does not exist independent of 
observation.  Or put somewhat differently, the manifestation of what we think of or define as "real" is 
intrinsically tied to and related to the act of observation of the system itself.  Niels Bohr is historically 
considered to be one of the strongest proponents of this interpretation, an interpretation which refuses to 
associate any metaphysical implications with the underlying theoretical model.  His position is that given this 
proven interdependence between that which is being observed and the act of observation itself, no 
metaphysical interpretation should, or in fact can, be extrapolated from the theory.  Quantum Mechanics 
from this perspective is simply a tool to describe and measure states and particle/wave behavior in the 
subatomic realm that are made as a result of some well-defined experiment.  
In other words, in Bohr's view, attempting to make some determination as to what Quantum Theory actually 
implies about the nature of reality, beyond the results of a given experiment, violates the fundamental tenets 
of the theory itself.  From Bohr's perspective, the inability to draw conclusions beyond the results of the 
experiments which the mathematical models predict, the yielding values or measurements from the 
experiments which run consistent with the stochastic mathematical models that underpin the theory, is in 
fact a necessary conclusion of the theorem's basic tenets and therefore all that can be said about the theory 
itself, its ultimate interpretation, is defined wholly and completely by the mathematical model itself and that 
was the end of the matter.  This view can also be seen as the logical conclusion of the principle of 
complementarity, one of the fundamental and intrinsic features of Quantum Theory that makes it so 
mysterious and hard to understand in classical terms.  Complementarity, which is closely tied to the 
Copenhagen Interpretation, expresses the notion that in the quantum domain the results of experiments, the 
values yielded (sometimes called observables) are fundamentally tied to the act of measurement itself.  In 
this sense complementarity can be viewed as the twin of uncertainty, or its inverse postulate.  
Bohr summarized this very subtle and yet at the same time very profound notion of complementarity in 1949 
as follows:

...however far the [quantum physical] phenomena transcend the scope of classical physical explanation, the 
account of all evidence must be expressed in classical terms.  The argument is simply that by the word 
"experiment" we refer to a situation where we can tell others what we have learned and that, therefore, the 
account of the experimental arrangements and of the results of the observations must be expressed in 
unambiguous language with suitable application of the terminology of Classical Mechanics.

This crucial point...implies the impossibility of any sharp separation between the behavior of atomic objects and 
the interaction with the measuring instruments which serve to define the conditions under which the 
phenomena appear.... Consequently, evidence obtained under different experimental conditions cannot be 
comprehended within a single picture, but must be regarded as complementary in the sense that only the 
totality of the phenomena exhausts the possible information about the objects. 

Furthermore, based upon the model and the principles of complementarity and uncertainty which are both 
mathematically proven "attributes" of the underlying theory, in order to obtain a complete picture of the 
state of any given system, one would need to run multiple experiments across a given system.  But any time 
an act of observation is made the state of the system changes - hence the notion of uncertainty which is a 
basic principle of any subatomic system that is subject to measurement or observation which again is a 
function of the underlying complementarity of the associated and related particles or corpuscles that are 
being measured in said system as fully described by the act of observation, mathematically described as 
wavefunction collapse.  
In this view, the basic characteristics of the subatomic world which is described by Quantum Theory are 
complementarity and uncertainty, and these characteristics in and of themselves say something profound 
about the underlying uncertainty of the theory itself from a Classical Mechanics, objective realist perspective.  
To Bohr, complementarity is in fact the core underlying principle which underpins the uncertainty principle 
and these two basic and fundamental characteristics of the model which describes the quantum world 
captured at some level its very essence.  Furthermore, according to Bohr and within the intellectual 
framework of the Copenhagen Interpretation generally speaking, these attributes taken to their logical and 
theoretical limits, do not allow for or provide any metaphysical framework for interpretations of the model 
beyond the model itself which is bound by a) the measurement values or results of a given experiment, b) the 
measurement instruments themselves that were part of a given experiment, and c) the act of measurement 
itself.  All that can be said about the model is contained within the model.

Another common and more recently popularized interpretation of Quantum Theory is that perhaps all 
possible outcomes as described in the wavefunction do in fact "exist", even if they could not be seen or 
perceived in our objective reality as defined by a given experiment of a given system.  This interpretation, 
which has come to be known in the literature as the many-worlds interpretation of Quantum Theory, actually 
incorporates all of the stochastic outcomes described within the wavefunction into the definition of reality 
itself so to speak.  So rather than the wavefunction being a mere mathematical tool as it were, in the many-
worlds interpretation the wavefunction is reality.  In other words, if the math itself is viewed as the 
description of the underlying "reality", and reality must conform to the basic underlying assumptions of 
Classical Mechanics - causal determinism, local realism, etc. - then wavefunction collapse which is a hallmark 
of Quantum Mechanics simply represents "one" of the many possible outcomes, one of the many "realities" 
that are inherent in the underlying system.  In this respect, the many-worlds interpretation can be seen as 
juxtaposed with the Copenhagen Interpretation which presupposes that the alternative outcomes implicit in 
the wavefunction which are not yielded upon the act of observation, i.e. again wavefunction collapse, do not 
have any real existence per se.  Although on the surface it might appear to be an outlandish premise, this 
interpretation of Quantum Theory has gained some prominence in the last few decades, especially within the 
Computer Science and Computational Complexity fields which are driven by pure math more or less.  
This original formulation of this theory was laid out by Hugh Everett in his PHD thesis in 1957 in a paper 
entitled The Theory of the Universal Wave Function wherein he referred to the interpretation not as "Many-
Worlds" but, much more aptly and more accurately given his initial formulation of the theoretical extensions 
of Quantum Mechanics that he proposed, as the relative-state formulation of Quantum Mechanics.  Almost 
completely ignored by the broader scientific community for several decades after he published his work, the 
theory was subsequently developed and expanded upon by several authors in the last decade or two and has 
come to be known, along with its variants that have cropped up, as the many-worlds interpretation.  Everett 
was a graduate student at Princeton at the time that he authored The Theory of the Universal Wave Function 
and his advisor was John Wheeler, one of the most respected theoretical physicists of the latter half of the 
twentieth century.  In Everett's original exposition of the theory, he begins by calling out some of the 
problems with the original, or classic, interpretation of Quantum Mechanics, specifically what he and other 
members of the physics community believed to be the artificial creation of the notion of wavefunction 
collapse to explain the quantum uncertain to deterministic behavior transitions, as well as the difficulty that 
standard interpretations of the theory had in dealing with systems that consisted of more than one observer.  
These he considered to be the main drivers behind his search for an alternative view, interpretation, or 
theoretical extension even of Quantum Theory.  He actually referred to his relative-state formulation of 
Quantum Theory as a metatheory given that the standard interpretation could be derived from it.
After writing his thesis, Everett did not in fact continue a career in academia and therefore subsequent 
interpretations and expansions upon his theory were left to later authors and researchers, most notably by 
Bryce Dewitt who coined the term "many-worlds", and David Deutsch among others.  DeWitt's book on the 
topic published in 1973 entitled The Many-Worlds Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics in many respects 
popularized this interpretation and brought it back into mainstream Physics and it included a reprint of 
Everett's thesis.  Deutsch's seminal work on the topic is a book entitled The Fabric of Reality published in 
1997 where he expands and extends the many-worlds interpretation to other academic disciplines outside of 
Physics such as Philosophy, specifically epistemology, Computer Science and Quantum Computing, and even 
Biology and theories of evolution.  Although Bohr, and presumably Heisenberg and von Neumann as well, 
whose collective views Quantum Theory's philosophical implications make up the Copenhagen Interpretation, 
would no doubt explain away these strange and seemingly arbitrary assumptions as out of scope of the 
theory itself (i.e. Quantum Theory is intellectually and epistemologically bound by the experimental 
apparatus and their associated experimental results), Everett finds this view philosophically limiting and at 
the very least worth exploring tweaks and extensions to the theory to see if these shortcomings can be 
removed, and in turn what the implications are theoretically speaking when some of the more standard and 
orthodox assumptions of Quantum Mechanics are relaxed in some sense.
In Everett's original conception of what he called the relative-state formulation of Quantum Mechanics" , is 
conceived to augment the standard interpretation of Quantum Theory (read Copenhagen Interpretation) 
which theoretically prevents us from any true explanation as to what the theory says about the nature of 
"reality" itself, or the real world as it were - a world which is presumed to be governed by the laws of 
Classical Physics where "things" and "objects", i.e. measurable phenomena, exist independent of observers.  
Where "objects" or "particles", depending upon the physical context, have real, well defined, static 
measurable and definable qualities that exist independently of the act of measurement or observation.  This 
world of course is fundamentally incompatible with the underlying mathematical characteristics of Quantum 
Mechanics, a model which is stochastic, i.e. a probabilistic, where the outcomes of experiments are 
effectively defined by their uncertainty and complementarity, which seemingly contradict the underlying 
assumptions of Classical Mechanics.  
Given the implications of this interpretation and again its more widespread adoption in recent years and in 
popular culture, it's important that we understand it's basic principles and tenets as Everett understood 
them.  Everett's starts by making the following two basic assumptions:

1)	he assumes that all physical systems large or small can be described as states within Hilbert space, 
the fundamental geometric framework upon which Quantum Mechanics  is constructed, and 
2)	he abstracts the notion of the observer as a machine-like entity with access to unlimited memory, 
which stores a history of previous states, or previous observations, and also has the ability to make 
simple deductions, or associations, regarding actions and behavior of system states solely based 
upon this memory and deductive reasoning.

His second assumption represents a marked distinction between it and Quantum Theory proper and 
incorporates observers and acts of observation (i.e. measurement) completely into one holistic theoretical 
model.  Furthermore, Everett proposes, and this is the core part of his thesis, that if you yield to assumptions 
1 and 2, you can come up with an extension to Quantum Mechanics that describes the entire state of the 
universe, which includes the observers and objects of observation, that can be described in a completely 
mathematically consistent, coherent and fully deterministic manner without the need of the notion of 
wavefunction collapse or any additional assumptions regarding locality or causal determinism for that matter 
from which the standard interpretation of Quantum Theory as it were, can be deduced.

The aim is not to deny or contradict the conventional formulation of quantum theory, which has demonstrated 
its usefulness in an overwhelming variety of problems, but rather to supply a new, more general and complete 
formulation, from which the conventional interpretation can be deduced. 


Everett makes what he calls a simplifying assumption to Quantum Theory, i.e. removing the need for or 
notion of wavefunction collapse, and assumes the existence of a Universal Wave Function which accounts for 
and describes the behavior of all physical systems and their interaction in the universe, completely including 
the observer and the act of observation into the model - observers being viewed as simply another form of a 
quantum state that interacts with the environment.  Once these assumptions are made, he can then abstract 
the notion of measurement, which is the source of much of the oddity and complexity surrounding Quantum 
Theory, as simply interactions between quantum systems that are all governed by this same Universal Wave 
Function.  In Everett's self-proclaimed metatheory, the notion of what an observer means and how they fit 
into the overall model are fully defined, and what he views as the seemingly arbitrary notion of wavefunction 
collapse is circumvented.  His metatheory is defined by the assumption of the existence of a Universal Wave 
Function which corresponds to the existence of a fully deterministic multi-verse based reality whereby 
wavefunction collapse is understood as a specific manifestation of the realization of one possible outcome of 
measurement that exists in our "reality", or our specific multi-verse, i.e. the one which we observe during our 
act of measurement.  
But in Everett's theoretical description of the universe, if you take what can be described as a literal 
interpretation of this Universal Wave Function as the overarching description of reality, the other, 
unobserved, possible states reflected in the wavefunction of any system in question do not cease to exist 
with the act of observation.  In Everett's original conception of Quantum Theory, his so-called relative-state 
formulation, the act of observation of a given system does not represent a "collapse" of the quantum 
mechanical wave that describes a given system state, but that these other states that are inherent in the 
wavefunction itself, while they do not manifest in our act of observation of said system do however have 
some existence per se.  To what degree and level of reality these "states" exists is a somewhat open ended 
question in this model and is the subject of much debate in subsequent interpretations of Everett's 
metatheory, i.e. the relative-state formulation, but regardless according to Everett's original conception of 
relative-state formulation, observers and observed phenomena are abstracted to a single mathematical 
construct which is derived from the wavefunction itself, i.e. the Universal Wave Function, and collectively are 
entirely descriptive of not just a given state of a given system, but also in turn the entire physical universe, 
most of which is simply not perceived by us as we "observe" it.  
What Everett has put forward with his notion of the Universal Wave Function really, with the so-called 
relative-state formulation of Quantum Mechanics, is a full ontological description of reality that is implied in 
the underlying mathematics of Quantum Theory, a complete metaphysics as it were, an interpretation that 
certainly goes well beyond the standard Copenhagen Interpretation with respect to ontology.  In his own 
words, and this is a subtle yet important distinction between Everett's view and the view of subsequent 
proponents of the many-worlds interpretation , these so-called "unobserved" states exist but remain 
uncorrelated with the observer in question, an observer that is incorporated and abstracted into his notion of 
a Universal Wave Function which models all of "reality", again observed phenomenon and observers 
themselves.

We now consider the question of measurement in quantum mechanics, which we desire to treat as a natural 
process within the theory of pure wave mechanics.  From our point of view there is no fundamental distinction 
between "measuring apparata" and other physical systems.  For us, therefore, a measurement is simply a 
special case of interaction between physical systems - an interaction which has the property of correlating a 
quantity in one subsystem with a quantity in another. 

This is his great intellectual leap, that measurement systems and observers are intrinsically, from a 
mathematical and metaphysical perspective, basically the same thing.  The implications of this somewhat 
simple and elegant additional layer of abstraction upon the underlying math of Quantum Mechanics is that 
these so-called "unobserved" or "unperceived" states do have some semblance of reality.  That they do in 
fact exist as possible realities, realities that are thought to have varying levels of "existence" depending upon 
which version of the many-worlds interpretation you adhere to.  With DeWitt and Deutsch for example, a 
more literal, or "actual" you might say, interpretation of Everett's original theory is taken, where these other 
states, these other realities or multi-verses, do in fact physically exist even though they cannot be perceived 
or validated by experiment.   This is a more literal interpretation of Everett's thesis however, and certainly 
nowhere does Everett explicitly state that these other potential uncorrelated states as he calls them actually 
physically exist.  What he does say on the matter, presumably in response to some critics of his metatheory, 
seems to imply some form of existence of these "possible" or potential universes that reflect non-measured 
or non-actualized states of physical systems, but not necessarily that these unrealized outcomes actually exist 
in some alternative physical universe which is typically how the many-worlds interpretation of Quantum 
Theory is commonly understood today (hence the name), again a significant deviation from Everett's original 
conception. 

In reply to a preprint of this article some correspondents have raised the question of the "transition from 
possible to actual," arguing that in "reality" there is-as our experience testifies-no such splitting of observer 
states, so that only one branch can ever actually exist.  Since this point may occur to other readers the following 
is offered in explanation.

The whole issue of the transition from "possible" to "actual" is taken care of in the theory in a very simple 
way-there is no such transition, nor is such a transition necessary for the theory to be in accord with our 
experience.  From the viewpoint of the theory all elements of a superposition (all "branches") are "actual," 
none any more "real" than the rest.  It is unnecessary to suppose that all but one are somehow destroyed, since 
all the separate elements of a superposition individually obey the wave equation with complete indifference to 
the presence or absence ("actuality" or not) of any other elements.  This total lack of effect of one branch on 
another also implies that no observer will ever be aware of any "splitting" process.

Arguments that the world picture presented by this theory is contradicted by experience, because we are 
unaware of any branching process, are like the criticism of the Copernican theory that the mobility of the earth 
as a real physical fact is incompatible with the common sense interpretation of nature because we feel no such 
motion.  In both cases the argument fails when it is shown that the theory itself predicts that our experience will 
be what it in fact is.  (In the Copernican case the addition of Newtonian physics was required to be able to show 
that the earth's inhabitants would be unaware of any motion of the earth.) 

According to Everett's view then, the act of measurement of a quantum system, and its associated principles 
of uncertainty and entanglement, is simply the reflection of this splitting off of the observable universe from a 
higher order notion of a multi-verse where all possible outcomes and alternate histories have the potential to 
exist.  The radical form of the many-worlds interpretation is that these potential, unmanifested realities do in 
fact exist, whereas Everett seems to only go so far as to imply that they "could" exist and that conceptually 
their existence should not be ignored but at the same time their existence need not have any bearing on our 
conception or notion of "reality".  As hard as this many-worlds interpretation (sometimes referred to as the 
many-minds interpretation) of Quantum Theory might be to wrap your head around, it does represent a 
somewhat elegant theoretically and mathematically sound solution to some of the criticisms and challenges 
raised by the broader Physics community against Quantum Theory, namely the EPR Paradox and the 
Schrödinger's cat problems.  It does also raise some significant questions however as to the validity of his 
underlying theory of mind and subjective experience in general, notions which Everett somewhat glosses 
over (albeit intentionally, he is not constructing a theory of mind nor does he ever state that he intends to in 
any way) by making the simple assumption that observers can be incorporated into his Universal Wave 
Function view of reality by abstracting them into simple deductive reasoning and memory based machines.  
Nonetheless this aspect of Everett's interpretation of Quantum Theory, his implicit and simplified theory of 
observation and the role of mind, remains one of the most hotly debated and widely criticized aspect of his 
metatheory, and one upon which arguably his entire theoretical model rests. 

The last of the so-called interpretations of Quantum Theory that are relevant to this study is what we refer to 
throughout as Bohmian Mechanics, a fully deterministic model of Quantum Theory pioneered by David 
Bohm, one of the most prolific Physicists of the twentieth century.  David Bohm was an American born British 
physicist of the twentieth century who made a variety of contributions to Physics, but who also invested 
much time and thought into the metaphysical, really ontological, implications of Quantum Theory, and in 
Philosophy in general, topics that in fact most Physicists have steered away from.  In this respect Bohm was a 
bit of a rebel relative to his peers in the academic community because he extended the hard science of 
Physics into the more abstract realm of the descriptions of reality as a whole, incorporating first philosophy 
back into the discussion in many respects, but doing so with the tool of hard mathematics, making his 
theories very hard, if not impossible, to ignore by the Physics community at large, and establishing a scientific 
- really mathematical - foothold for some very Eastern philosophical metaphysical assumptions, all bundled 
together under a notion that Bohm referred to as undivided wholeness.  
Bohm was, like Everett and many others in the Physics community (Einstein of course being the most well-
known), dissatisfied with mainstream interpretations of Quantum Mechanics, in particular the so-called 
Copenhagen Interpretation which basically said that Quantum Theory was just a predictive modeling tool and 
cannot be used as the basis for any sort of metaphysical or ontological interpretation regarding the true 
nature of reality whatsoever.  This led him, apparently with some prodding by Einstein with whom he had 
ongoing dialogue toward the end of Einstein's life, to look for possible hidden variable theories which could 
take the probability and uncertainty out of Quantum Theory and provide for - at least from an ontological 
and metaphysical perspective at least - a common set of assumptions across all of Physics.  Bohmian 
Mechanics is the result of this work, and although it generally speaking has not gained much traction in the 
scientific and academic community the model does a) prove that hidden variable theories are actually 
possible (something that still remained in doubt well into the 70s and 80s even decades after Bohm first 
published his adaptation of de Broglie's pilot-wave theory which supported multi-bodied systems in the 
1950s) and b) actually provided for a somewhat rational (at least rational from a Classical Mechanics point of 
view) explanation of what might actually be going on in this subatomic world where waves and particles 
seemed to blend into this non-classical, indeterministic reality - albeit requiring the relaxation of at least one 
of the prominent assumptions underlying Classical Mechanics, i.e. locality.  
The foundations for Bohmian Mechanics were laid by Louis de Broglie in 1927 when he originally proposed 
that Schrödinger's wavefunction could be interpreted as describing the existence a central physical particle 
accompanied by a so-called "pilot-wave" that governed its behavior, thereby physically explaining why these 
subatomic "particles" behaved like waves and particles depending upon the experiment.  De-Broglie's pilot-
wave theory in its original form affirms the existence of subatomic particles, or corpuscles as they were called 
back then, but viewed these particles not as independent existing entities but as integrated into an 
undercurrent, or wave, which was fully described by Schrödinger's wavefunction and gave these subatomic 
particles their wave-like characteristics of diffraction and interference while at the same time explained their 
particle like behavior as illustrated in certain experiments.  This represented a significant divergence from 
standard interpretations of Quantum Theory at the time.  From his original 1927 paper on the topic, de 
Broglie describes pilot-wave theory as follows:

One will assume the existence, as distinct realities, of the material point and of the continuous wave 
represented by the [wavefunction], and one will take it as a postulate that the motion of the point is 
determined as a function of the phase of the wave by the equation.  One then conceives the continuous wave as 
guiding the motion of the particle.  It is a "pilot wave". 

De Broglie's pilot-wave theory was dismissed by the broader academic community however when it was 
presented at the time however due to the fact that the model, as presented by de Broglie, could only be used 
to describe single-body systems.  This fact, along with the then very strong belief that any variant of hidden 
variable theories were theoretically impossible as put forth by von Neumann in paper he published in 1932 
which led to the abandonment of pilot-wave theory by the Physics community as a possible alternative 
explanation of Quantum Mechanics for some two decades or so until it was picked back up by Bohm after 
von Neumann's thesis that no local hidden variable theories were possible was proven to be false, or at least 
not nearly as restrictive as originally presumed.   According to Bohm, one of the motivations for exploring 
the possibility of a fully deterministic/causal extension of Quantum Theory was not necessarily because he 
believed it to be the right interpretation, the correct one, but to show the possibility of such theories, the 
existence of which was cast into serious doubt after the development of von Neumann's mathematical work 
in the 1930s, and even after Bell's continuation of these theoretical constraints on Quantum Theory, which 
did in fact allow for non-local hidden variable theories, in the 1960s. 

... it should be kept in mind that before this proposal was made there had existed the widespread impression 
that no conceptions of hidden variables at all, not even if they were abstract, and hypothetical, could possibly 
be consistent with the quantum theory. 

So in the early 1950s Bohm, driven primarily by the desire to illustrate that hidden variable theories were in 
fact possible, picked up where de Broglie left off and extended pilot-wave theory to support multi-body 
physical systems., giving the theory a more solid scientific and mathematical ground and providing a fully 
developed, alternative theoretical and mathematical description of Quantum Mechanics for consideration by 
the broader Physics community.  In the new framework, what he refers to as the Ontological Interpretation 
of Quantum Theory, Bohm-Hiley extend the underlying mathematics of Quantum Mechanics to include a 
fundamentally non-local force called quantum potential, a force which provided the rational and 
mathematical foundations for the explanation of non-local correlations between subatomic particles and 
their associated measurements.  In his Ontological Interpretation, Bohm-Hiley suggests that it was in fact the 
actual position and momentum of the underlying particle(s) in question that were the so called hidden 
variables, values which governed, along with the quantum potential, how a quantum wave-particle would 
behave, effectively sidestepping the so-called measurement problem, i.e. the need for wavefunction collapse
The force of quantum potential, as Bohm-Hiley describe it is not the same type of force that underlies most of 
Classical Mechanics, where its effect is a function of intensity or magnitude.  It is this extra variable, one 
which is inherently non-local in the Classical Mechanics sense, along with the Schrödinger equation, i.e. the 
wavefunction, which in toto govern and fully determine the behavior of a quantum system and has the 
potential (no pun intended) to fully describe all of its future and past states, irrespective of whether or not 
the quantum system is observed or measured.  This is how Bohmian Mechanics can be said to be fully 
causally deterministic, hence the Causal Interpretation name given to the model in some circles.  It is the 
notion of quantum potential that is the theoretical glue to speak that keeps Bohmian Mechanics together 
and, along with the establishment of the actual position and momentum of a given particle (or set of 
particles) as being fundamentally real, is the mathematical (and metaphysical) tool that is used to explain 
what's actually going on in the quantum realm.  In other words - and this implication and assumption which 
underlies Bohmian Mechanics cannot be overstated - the quantum system not only has some definitive initial 
state, but it also knows about its environment to a certain extent, information that is embedded in the 
underlying quantum potential of a given system, a variable which can be added to the more standard 
mathematical models of Quantum Mechanics without changing any of the predictive results or fundamental 
attributes or properties of the underlying equations. 
Quantum potential in Bohm's view is a force that is universally present not only in the quantum realm but 
underlying all of Physics, a force that effectively becomes negligent as the quantum system becomes 
sufficiently large and complex and is transformed from a system that exhibits both wave and particle like 
behavior to a system governed by Classical Mechanics as described by Newton.  It provides us with an 
explanation for wavefunction collapse and quantum measurement uncertainty as put forth by Heisenberg, 
von Neumann and others by positing that the Schrödinger's wavefunction does in fact fully describe quantum 
system behavior, that the actual position and momentum of a given quantum state does in fact exist even if it 
is not measured or observed, and that there exists some element of non-local active information within the 
environment which explains the observable and experimentally verifiable existence of the correlation of 
physically separated quantum entities, i.e. correlated observables.  As John Stewart Bell, a proponent in the 
latter part of his career of Bohmian Mechanics (what he refers to as de Broglie-Bohm theory) puts it: 

That the guiding wave, in the general case, propagates not in ordinary three-space but in a multidimensional-
configuration space is the origin of the notorious 'nonlocality' of quantum mechanics.  It is a merit of the de 
Broglie-Bohm version to bring this out so explicitly that it cannot be ignored. 

Bohmian Mechanics, as Bohm's exposition of de Broglie's pilot-wave theory later evolved into its more 
mature form, provides a mathematical framework within which subatomic reality can indeed be thought of 
as actually existing independent of an observer or an act of measurement, a significant departure from 
standard interpretations of the theory that were prevalent for most of the twentieth century, i.e. the 
Copenhagen Interpretation mostly.  In modern Philosophical terms, it's a fully realist interpretation of 
Quantum Theory, providing a full ontological description as it were - one that's also fully deterministic, albeit 
non-local - of the reality that underpins Quantum Theory which is implicit to the wavefunction - hence the 
name that Bohm gives his so-called interpretation of Quantum Theory, i.e. the Ontological Interpretation.  
Bohmian Mechanics furthermore is consistent with Bell's Theorem, which again states that no "local" hidden 
variable theories could ever reproduce all the predictions of Quantum Mechanics, and also at the same time 
directly addresses the concerns regarding completeness of Schrödinger's wavefunction as a description of the 
subatomic world that were raised by the famed EPR Paper.   
Furthermore, Bohmian Mechanics is fully deterministic, proving that once the value of these hidden variables 
of position and momentum of the underlying particles within the system are known, and once an additional 
non-local attribute is added to the system state (i.e. quantum potential), all future states (and even past 
states) could be calculated and known as well.  This solution effectively relieves and solves many of the 
problems and paradoxes that were/are inherent in standard interpretations Quantum Theory such as 
uncertainty and complementarity (i.e. entanglement), as well as getting rid of the need for wavefunction 
collapse.  It furthermore provides us with a mathematically sound description of Quantum Mechanics which 
rests on almost all of the same basic underlying assumptions of Classical Mechanics, everything except the 
notion of locality.  Bohmian Mechanics falls into the category of hidden variable theories.  It lays out a 
description of quantum reality where the wavefunction, along with the notion of quantum potential, together 
represent a fully deterministic, albeit again non-local, description of the subatomic world - mathematically 
speaking.  With respect to the importance of Bohm's work in Quantum Mechanics, Bell himself, albeit some 
30 years after Bohm originally published his extension of de Broglie's pilot-wave theory, had this to say:

But in 1952 I saw the impossible done.  It was in papers by David Bohm. Bohm showed explicitly how 
parameters could indeed be introduced, into nonrelativistic wave mechanics, with the help of which the 
indeterministic description could be transformed into a deterministic one.  More importantly, in my opinion, the 
subjectivity of the orthodox version, the necessary reference to the 'observer,' could be eliminated. ...

But why then had Born not told me of this 'pilot wave'?  If only to point out what was wrong with it?  Why did 
von Neumann not consider it?  More extraordinarily, why did people go on producing ''impossibility'' proofs, 
after 1952, and as recently as 1978? ... Why is the pilot wave picture ignored in text books?  Should it not be 
taught, not as the only way, but as an antidote to the prevailing complacency?  To show us that vagueness, 
subjectivity, and indeterminism, are not forced on us by experimental facts, but by deliberate theoretical 
choice? 

Again, in this model it is the "actual" position and momentum of said particle which is the so-called hidden 
variable which in turn determine the result of a given experiment or observable result.  Bohmian Mechanics 
agrees with all of the mathematical predictions of standard interpretations of Quantum Theory, i.e. its 
mathematically equivalent, but it extends the theoretical model to try and explain what is actually going on, 
what is driving the non-local behavior of these subatomic "things" and what in fact can be said to be known 
about the state of quantum systems independent of the act of measurement or observation.  With this 
notion of quantum potential, Bohm provides a mathematical as well as metaphysical principle which "guides" 
subatomic particle(s), gives them some sense of environmental awareness, even if the reality he describes, 
again the so-called Ontological Interpretation of Quantum Theory, does not necessarily abide by the same 
principles of Classical Mechanics gives its assumptions regarding locality - i.e. that all objects or things are 
governed by and behave according to the principles of Classical Mechanics which are bound by the 
constraints of Relativity and the fixed speed of light, principles which have been demonstrated to be wholly 
inconsistent with Quantum Mechanics, causing of course much consternation in the Physics community and 
calling into question local realism in general.  
Bohmian Mechanics contribution to Quantum Mechanics, and Physics as a whole in fact, is not only that it 
calls into question the presumption of local realism specifically, what Einstein referred to as "spooky action at 
a distance", but also in that it proved unequivocally that hidden variable theories are in fact theoretically and 
mathematically possible and still consistent with the basic tenets of Quantum Mechanics.  Bohm in fact 
"completes" Quantum Mechanics in the very sense that the EPR Paper described when published in 1935 
which is illustrated in their famed EPR Paradox. Bohmian Mechanics, whether you believed its underlying 
metaphysical assumptions about what was really going on in the subatomic realm, constructed in a very 
sound mathematical and theoretical model that was entirely consistent with Quantum Mechanics, the 
grounding of physical reality and existence itself as it were, brought very clear attention to the fact that our 
notions of time and space, and the perception of reality itself, was in need of a wholesale revision in terms of 
basic assumptions.  What Bohmian Mechanics calls our attention to quite directly, and in a very 
uncomfortable way from a Classical Mechanics perspective, is that there are metaphysical assumptions about 
reality in general that are fully baked into Classical Mechanics that must be relaxed in order to understand, 
and in fact explain, Quantum Mechanics.  Furthermore, it was these same subatomic particles (and/or waves) 
whose behavior which was modeled so successfully with Quantum Mechanics, that in some shape or form 
constituted the basic building blocks of the entire "classically" physical world - this fact could not be denied - 
and yet the laws and theorems that have been developed to describe this behavior, i.e. Classical Mechanics, 
were and still are fundamentally incompatible with the laws that govern the subatomic realm, specifically the 
underlying assumptions about what is "real" and how these objects of reality behave and are related to each 
other.  
While the Copenhagen Interpretation of Quantum Theory holds that the model is simply a calculation tool 
and is bound by certain metaphysical constraints that are inherent to the theoretical model itself, Bohmian 
Mechanics, as well as Everett's relative-state formulation in fact, provide explanations to what Quantum 
Theory's underlying mathematics tells us about the nature of the universe we live in, about reality itself or 
again in Philosophical terms with respect to ontology (albeit drawing very different conclusions about the 
nature of the reality that is being described), arguably requiring us to reconsider the underlying assumptions 
that sit at the very foundation of Classical Mechanics.  In Bohm's own words:

...in relativity, movement is continuous, causally determinate and well defined, while in quantum mechanics it is 
discontinuous, not causally determinate and not well-defined.  Each theory is committed to its own notions of 
essentially static and fragmentary modes of existence (relativity to that of separate events connectible 
by signals, and quantum mechanics to a well-defined quantum state).  One thus sees that a new kind of theory 
is needed which drops these basic commitments and at most recovers some essential features of the older 
theories as abstract forms derived from a deeper reality in which what prevails is unbroken wholeness. 

And Bohm didn't stop with his Ontological Interpretation of Quantum Theory, he expanded its theoretical 
foundations to establish a grounding of a new order, an order which could encompass not only Classical 
Mechanics and Quantum Mechanics, but one that encompassed the role of the observer, consciousness 
itself, as well.  This is his notion of the implicate order and holomovement, principles upon which a sound 
logical, rational and holistic metaphysical framework could be constructed which encompassed all of 
existence; physical, mental and psychological, and in many respects covering all of the theological and 
philosophical ground that rested at the core of Descartes's notion of res cogitans, res extensa and God but 
encompassing Physics as well.  To Bohm, both Classical Mechanics as well as Quantum Mechanics could be 
looked at not as inconsistent with each other, but as different manifestations of what he referred to as the 
implicate order, an underlying order which reflected pre-spatial phenomenon which manifested itself in the 
various physical planes of existence, in the case of various scales, in what he termed explicate orders.  

My attitude is that the mathematics of the quantum theory deals primarily with the structure of the implicate 
pre-space and with how an explicate order of space and time emerges from it, rather than with movements of 
physical entities, such as particles and fields. (This is a kind of extension of what is done in general relativity, 
which deals primarily with geometry and only secondarily with the entities that are described within this 
geometry.) 

Bohm, and Basil Hiley who contributed to and co-authored their text that described in detail their Ontological 
Interpretation of Quantum Theory, not only proved that non-local hidden variable theories of Quantum 
Mechanics were possible, but also that in order to truly understand what was happening at this underlying 
substratum of existence, the notion of intellect, or at some level what could be construed as consciousness, 
had to be considered as an active participant in the model that explained what was going on - this is again 
what sits behind their notion of quantum potential, the means by which a quantum system is "informed" of 
its environment as it were, underpinning the notion of active information that complemented and 
augmented the wavefunction to govern elementary behavior - behavior that Bohm and Hiley at least 
considered to be "intelligent" in a way, or at the very least aware of the various elements of the environment 
beyond any Classical Mechanical boundaries.  Their idea of active information, which is a, if not the, 
revolutionary idea that they propose to explain the subtleties and mysteries of subatomic behavior, implies 
that there is some sort of awareness the overall interconnected quantum environment which must be 
considered in order to fully explain quantum system behavior, an aspect which by its very nature violates 
some of the core assumptions of Classical Mechanics, namely that of local realism, i.e. that the behavior of 
any given "object" or system of objects is independently real, exists independent of the act of measurement 
or observation, and is governed entirely by the properties or qualities of said object or system or any forces 
which act on said system.  

In Bohm's Philosophy, his metaphysics (and we're no longer in Physics proper just to be clear), he believed 
that the quantum reality, its explicate order that we perceive and can measure and interact with by means of 
various experiments, is further governed by a higher implicate order that stems from some cognitive aspect 
of consciousness - i.e. the human mind or some aspect of cosmic mind, even if he isn't explicit in using this 
terminology.  That in fact we cannot get away from considering the role of mind, the role of the perceiver, in 
completely understanding quantum behavior or Quantum Theory in general.  He perhaps best describes his 
notion of the implicate order, its relationship to various explicate orders, and what he means by 
holomovement, and how these metaphysical constructs from his perspective can be used to understand the 
seemingly non-local forces/interaction that appear to be at work in Quantum Mechanics, with an analogy of 
a fish swimming in an aquarium being looked at and perceived through different camera lenses, each yielding 
a different perspective on what the fish looks like but at the same time describing the same fish:

Imagine a fish swimming in an aquarium.  Imagine also that you have never seen a fish or an aquarium before 
and your only knowledge about them comes from two television cameras - one directed at the aquarium's front 
and the other at its side.  When you look at the two television monitors you might mistakenly assume that the 
fish on the screens are separate entities.  After all, because the cameras are set at different angles, each of the 
images will be slightly different.  But as you continue to watch you will eventually realize there is a relationship 
between the two fish.  When one turns, the other makes a slightly different but corresponding turn.  When one 
faces the front, the other faces the side, and so on.  If you are unaware of the full scope of the situation, you 
might wrongly conclude that the fish are instantaneously communicating with one another, but this is not the 
case.  No communication is taking place because at a deeper level of reality, the reality of the aquarium, the 
two fish are actually one and the same.

All things found in the unfolded, explicate order emerge from the holomovement in which they are enfolded as 
potentialities, and ultimately they fall back to it.  They endure only for some time, and while they last, their 
existence is sustained in a constant process of unfoldment and re-enfoldment, which gives rise to their relatively 
stable and independent forms in the explicate order. 

From a conceptual perspective, one can think of Bohm's idea of implicate and explicate order using the 
analogy of a game of chess.  In chess, the game itself is governed by an explicate order, where the boundaries 
of the board and the rules of the overall game are established - who is white, who is black, the capturing of 
individual pieces, the goal of trying to capture the king to win the game, etc.  Furthermore, each piece in the 
game is governed by its own set of rules that determine how it can move across the board, another explicate 
order as it were that although subservient to the master explicate order of the game itself, represents an 
explicate order nonetheless.  And yet implicit to the game is the mind and objectives of the two players 
themselves, who although must operate and behave according to the aforementioned explicate order 
directives or laws/rules not only of the game itself but also with respect to the individual movements of 
individual pieces on the board, but yet at the same time, all the while governed by another, higher order, i.e. 
the objective of trying to "win the game" by capturing the opponent's king, i.e. the implicate order as it were.  
Each of the players (presumably if they are any good at chess) has the vision and intellect, the intelligence as 
it were, to leverage all of these different yet interrelated explicate orders - the explicate order of the game 
and the explicate orders which govern the behavior of the individual pieces - in an attempt to achieve the 
desired outcome, i.e. capture the king of the opponent which represents the underlying implicate order of 
the game in this analogy.  
The implicate order in this case is the mind of the player, from which each of the explicate orders unfolds as 
he (or she) moves each individual piece.  It is within this higher order that each of the players comes up with 
their own strategy and framework in mind, processing and reacting to information about the game itself as 
each move is made.  Each player understands how the game is to be played, what moves he can make as the 
game evolves and pieces come off the board - i.e. the underlying and always applicable explicate orders 
which govern the rules of the game - while at the same time the game is governed by a higher-level order 
which also describes the underlying behavior, the underlying reality" as it were, as to what is truly going on at 
a higher level of abstraction as it were.  This is the implicate order underlying the game, i.e. that each player 
is trying to "win".  [Interesting enough in this example there are really two different implicate orders at play 
which influence the outcome of the game, both of which obey the same set of rules but the interplay of 
which governs the overall behavior, the outcome, of not only the individual moves as they are made but the 
outcome of the game itself.]
In many respects, this notion of implicate order is echoed in Everett's relative-state formulation of Quantum 
Theory, i.e. that the underlying correlation of an observed state of a given system reflects our observation, 
the relative-state formulation of reality as it were, of a given quantum state and not that these other, 
uncorrelated, states that we do not perceive do not necessarily exist.  Everett's relative-state formulation of 
Quantum Mechanics ironically enough, and one of its biggest criticisms in fact, is that is fully coherent only 
because it incorporates a theory of mind directly into his model - a metaphysical construct which is 
abstracted into a quasi-mechanical reasoning machine (albeit greatly simplified relative to a functioning 
human mind) which has access to infinite memory that is capable of  "remembering" prior states of existence 
or prior observation states, which in turn provides the rational explanation of the collapse of the 
wavefunction as a misunderstanding of what is actually going on - namely the observance of one manifest, 
correlated, state, not necessarily the lack of existence of all of the uncorrelated states, leading of course to 
the seemingly perplex and somewhat confounding notion of the of the existence of many-worlds 
interpretation.  Bohm's metaphysics makes essentially the same philosophical leap, namely that it is the 
existence of an underlying implicate order which contains within it various explicate order which may or may 
not be manifest depending on which observational state, or perspective, we choose.  
To Bohm, and Hiley, this implicate order construct can also be used to incorporate a theory of mind (back) 
into Physics, reverting back to first philosophy as it were, or in more modern philosophical parlance again, 
ontology.  To Bohm, it is quantum potential or active information which point to the existence of a basic 
underlying consciousness or awareness that underpins physical reality - implying that the universe itself 
when looked at from this grand perspective, one that includes the act of perception along with that which is 
perceived (which arguably is an artifact and a necessary conclusion of Quantum Theory), points to the 
necessary conclusion of what he calls undivided wholeness.

It is now quite clear that if gravity is to be quantised successfully, a radical change in our understanding of 
spacetime will be needed.  We begin from a more fundamental level by taking the notion of process as our 
starting point.  Rather than beginning with a spacetime continuum, we introduce a structure process which, in 
some suitable limit, approximates to the continuum.  We are exploring the possibility of describing this process 
by some form of non-commutative algebra, an idea that fits into the general ideas of the implicate order.  In 
such a structure, the locality of quantum theory can be understood as a specific feature of this more general a-
local background and that locality, and indeed time, will emerge as a special feature of this deeper a-local 
structure. 

What is arguably the logical conclusions of any reasonable interpretation of Quantum Theory, leaving open 
the idea of at least some form of metaphysical/philosophical interpretation is possible (which seems 
rational), is that our notion of "order", and our notions and assumptions regarding the basic nature of reality 
- what falls under the discipline of ontology which is a major theme of this work -  need to be radically 
changed in order to account for all of the strange phenomenon, features and characteristics that come along 
with the tremendous predictive power of the underlying mathematics.  Some elemental and basic non-local 
principle must be incorporated into our ontology in order to incorporate the truth and empirical validity of 
Quantum Theory - that is to say that no matter what interpretation of Quantum Theory you find most 
attractive, at the very least the notion of local realism which underpins all of Classical Mechanics, all of 
Western philosophy really, must be abandoned in order to make sense of what is going on.  One would be 
hard pressed to find someone with a good understanding of Quantum Theory who would dispute this.  
In the words of Max Planck,, one of the greatest physicists of the 20th century by any measure, and words 
which you won't find in any Physics textbook mind you, he sums up the state of affairs as follows:

All matter originates and exists only by virtue of a force which brings the particle of an atom to vibration and 
holds this most minute solar system of the atom together.  We must assume behind this force the existence of a 
conscious and intelligent mind.  This mind is the matrix of all matter.