
Meditation then, in the context of the fairly lengthy discussions and treatment of this specific discipline, or 
practice, throughout this work (primarily through an Indian theo-philosophical lens) is a fundamentally aspect 
of, a core component of as it were, the mystical arts.  It is the scientific method, the means really, by which 
the culmination or end goal of all the mystic traditions is achieved or realized.  That is not to say that 
meditation underpins every mystical tradition per se, but where we do find it, it is a key element of the 
underlying mystical theo-philosophical "system" as it were.  Most modern readers will associate the term 
with Eastern philosophy no doubt (theo-philosophy in our nomenclature), but we stretch the term more 
broadly to fit it into the very ancient pre-historical context which is the thrust of Parts I and II of this work.  
From our ancient historical and theo-philosophical perspective, meditation as a discipline of the mystical arts 
can be traced to the classical period of the Indian theo-philosophical tradition in the 3rd/4th century CE - to 
the Yoga Sūtras specifically as the seventh of the eight limbs (dhyāna)  of Patañjali's system which has 
become so popular in the West today.
However Patañjali's system, albeit innovative and revolutionary from at least an intellectual if not theo-
philosophical perspective at least, even within the Indian theo-philosophical tradition from which it emerged, 
nonetheless traces its own origins to the core of the (orthodox) Indian theo-philosophical tradition itself 
which has its roots in the much older and more expansive and varied Indo-Aryan theo-philosophical tradition, 
the roots of which - at least from a literary treatise standpoint - lie in the Vedas primarily, and the 
secondarily in the Upanishads, the more philosophical and metaphysical portion of the Vedic corpus.  For 
example we see references to meditative practices, and contemplation more broadly, as an essential 
component of the spiritual practices outlined in the Bhagavad Gītā (the Song of the Lord), one of the most 
influential texts in the Indian theo-philosophical tradition whose composition is dated to the middle of the 
first millennium BCE or so (within the Mahābhārata epic of course), a treatise that has become one of the 
most important texts in the Indian theo-philosophical tradition, and in the theo-philosophical tradition of 
Vedānta in particular. 
If we look to the Upanishadic literature however, the philosophical portion of the Vedas, the bulk of which is 
dated also to the middle of the first millennium BCE, we find several more specific, and altogether "Yogic" 
references to practices and techniques that we associate with meditation.  The earliest of these which make 
direct reference to Yoga specifically, are from the Katha Upanishad, one of the most pre-eminent and 
influential of the Upanishadic philosophical treatises,  and the Śvetāśvatara Upanishad, the latter of which 
outlines specific disciplines and practices of , and in particular some of the hallmark breathing techniques, i.e. 
prāṇāyāma .  Both of these Upanishads are "Primary" or Mukhya Upanishads and as such represent the very 
heart of Upanishadic philosophy, clearly illustrating that Yoga, and the practice of meditation to which it is 
closely aligned and associated with, has its origins, at least within the context of the Indian theo-philosophical 
tradition, at least as far back as the middle of the first millennium BCE and in all likelihood at the very least a 
few centuries prior. 
However, even more interestingly, and again in line with one of the major theses of this work - i.e. a potential 
shared intellectual, theo-philosophical, heritage of the peoples of Eurasia in deep antiquity - we find explicit 
references to very "Yoga-like", meditative, practices and techniques even in the ancient Chinese theo-
philosophical tradition.  While the literary references are not nearly as widespread as in the Indian theo-
philosophical tradition, nor do we find the practices encapsulated in as dogmatic and structured of a system 
as we find them represented in the Yoga Sūtras for example (a much later development, again 3rd/4th century 
CE), but nonetheless references to very "Yoga-like" practices, i.e. meditation, nonetheless exist.  The specific 
passages we are speaking of are to be found in an ancient text that was discovered only at the end of the 20th 
century and is dated to the Warring States Period (403 - 221 BCE), a time of great philosophical and 
intellectual flourishing in ancient Chinese history - just as it was in fact to the West on the Indian 
subcontinent and throughout the Mediterranean - Egypt, Greece and the Near East essentially.   The text, 
attributed to the Daoist tradition given its similarities in language and content to the Lǎozǐ's Dàodé Jīng and 
Chuang-Tzu's Zhuangzi, is called Nei-yeh or simply Neiye, translated into English typically as Inward Training, 
or alternatively as Inner Cultivation, or Inner Development.  
The Nei-yeh text (26 poetic verses in all, some 1600 Old Chinese characters), was preserved by ancient 
Chinese scholars/librarians as part of the Kuan Tzu (Guanzi) collection of texts, a fairly extensive compilation 
of mostly political and economic treatises compiled circa 300 BCE but most likely edited and revised up until 
the very end of the 1st century BCE .  [However, as is the case with all ancient theo-philosophical works 
really, such texts no doubt preserved content, and betrayed theo-philosophical traditions, that were in 
existence well before the text was actually written.  As to how long before, that is one of the topics and areas 
we explore in this work, as reflected in the study of oral traditions more generally in antiquity, seen 
specifically as a (linguistic) technological innovation that allowed for the transmission of ideas, in a very 
particular and specific linguistic form, order and cadence, over generations at least, centuries in all likelihood, 
and perhaps much longer than that.]  The Nei-yeh was written in ancient Old Chinese, the oldest attested 
literary form of Chinese that was used during the Zhou and Warring States Periods, i.e. roughly throughout 
most of the first millennium BCE.  The text is composed almost entirely of poetic, rhythmic verses that clearly 
represent an oral tradition which preceded the composition of the actual text, precisely the same technique 
used for the transmission of theo-philosophical ideas and practices in the Indian theo-philosophical tradition, 
as we see in the Bhagavad Gītā and the Upanishads for example.  
As an example of references to very "Yogic", "spiritual" practices, techniques and principles, i.e. meditation, 
in the Nei-yeh, take the following verse in English translation below, keeping in mind the rhythmic and poetic 
structure of the language in the original Chinese, similar to the literary style of the Dàodé Jīng (hence, along 
with the philosophical content itself as well, the association of the text with the Daoist tradition):

By concentrating your vital breath as if numinous,
The myriad things will all be contained within you.
Can you concentrate? Can you unite with them?
Can you not resort to divining by tortoise or milfoil
Yet know bad and good fortune?

Can you stop? Can you cease?
Can you not seek it in others,
Yet attain it within yourself?
You think and think about it
And think still further about it.
You think, yet still cannot penetrate it.
While the ghostly and numinous will penetrate it,
It is not due to the power of the ghostly and numinous,
But to the utmost refinement of your essential vital breath.

When the four limbs are aligned
And the blood and vital breath are tranquil,
Unify your awareness, concentrate your mind,
Then your eyes and ears will not be overstimulated.
And even the far-off will seem close at hand. 

Clearly, we can see here the description of some sort of meditative practice, one that is tied to the 
overarching goal or end of the theo-philosophical system itself - in this case the Dao.  This general structure, 
metaphysical architecture if you will, is almost precisely what we find in the Indian theo-philosophical 
tradition as reflected in the Upanishads for example.  Furthermore, the technique described here is quite 
specific, emphasizing the role of "breath", or "vital energy", ch'i, or qì , a critically important concept that 
permeates the entire ancient Chinese theo-philosophical landscape really, beyond just the Daoist tradition.  
This concept almost precisely corresponds to the very important Indian theo-philosophical concept prāṇa, 
which more literally translated from the Sanskrit also means "vital breath" or "vital energy", but also (like the 
word/character qì in Chinese) has etymological roots tying it more broadly, and anthropomorphically, to 
"breath" and "air".   We also see here a fairly specific allusion to the cessation of thought as a component of 
the "practice" as well, an idea that is integral to very definition of Yoga as it is outlined in the Yoga Sūtras, 
albeit a much later (3rd/4th century CE) text .  Furthermore, we find at the end of the verse, a reference to 
the seat or posture, i.e. "alignment of the limbs", to which a parallel can clearly be drawn to Yogic āsanas 
("seat" or "posture"), a notion that of course is pivotal to many schools of Yoga, particularly many of the 
schools which are practiced in the West today which derive, at least theo-philosophically, from the Yoga of 
Patañjali.  
Altogether, we see a striking resemblance of the meditative practices and techniques described in the Daoist 
Nei-yeh text to the meditative practices and techniques that underpin the Indian theo-philosophical tradition.  
This begs the question of course, a seed thought that was a major driving force of this work in fact, as to how 
these practices and techniques found themselves in the ancient Far East, well before there is any evidence of 
trade or communication of any kind really between the cultures and peoples that inhabited the Indian 
subcontinent in antiquity, and the peoples and cultures that inhabited what we refer to today as China in 
antiquity, being separated by a massive mountain range as it were, i.e. the Himalayas.  What we find in fact, 
is that not only are the practices and techniques described very similar, but some of the core theo-
philosophical principles at work are almost exactly the same as well, as is the literary form (rhythmic, 
rhyming, "poetic" verse), within which the ideas are preserved and transmitted.
If we take this now quite broad view of meditation, as a cross cultural practice that has its roots in deep 
antiquity (rather than as an Indian or Yogic/Buddhist practice), and we furthermore look at the practice as 
form, or manifestation, of the mystical arts, one that is removed or abstracted from devotional or ceremonial 
worship, theologically agnostic in a way - even though it is probably from these very old and ancient, pre-
historical ceremonial forms of worship to the gods and deities of the basic natural of cosmic world order 
(wind, sun, earth, moon, stars, etc.) from which the practice was synthesized and cultivated from.  From this 
vantage point, we can perhaps transform our somewhat dogmatic and theologically specific (religious really) 
notion of meditation into something more universal and ever present - a practice which has existed for 
millennia, and which crosses all sorts of geographic and cultural boundaries and therefore isn't "owned" and 
wasn't "created" by any one person, nation or theological system (again religion).  Herein lies the wisdom of 
the Indian theo-philosophical tradition who attributes the knowledge of the Vedas to "ancient seers", or 
rishis (ṛṣi in Sanskrit) who "divined" the knowledge and transcribed it, formulated it as it were, to the Sanskrit 
tongue.  In contrast to the orthodox and scripturally obsessive Western theological tradition, the Indian theo-
philosophical tradition emphasizes the eternal existence of, and the fundamentally reality and truth of, the 
"content" of the Vedas, not the words of the Vedas (although they are holy no doubt just not sacrosanct in 
the way that Biblical scripture is held to be in the West), and that the underlying truth therein is timeless and 
ageless and co-existent with the universe itself. 
From this perspective then, meditation as an art and a practice was certainly not "invented" by Patañjali in 
the 3rd or 4th century CE, nor was it invented by Buddha some 8 centuries prior, it can be looked upon as the 
crystallization, the culmination if you will, of millennia of spiritual, theological, metaphysical and ultimately 
mystical practices from pre-history that manifest themselves in these various theo-philosophical traditions 
from antiquity - the ones that we know from history class that we can study "through" not just the 
archeological findings, but through their literary traditions as well which gives us a much more expanded and 
complete perspective, intellectually speaking, into the belief systems of these ancient peoples.  And what we 
find is that meditation, in the more broad and general sense that we use the term here and throughout this 
work, as a mystical art that is a shared heritage of humanity really, I arguably one of the defining 
characteristics of modern, civilized man.
In effect then, when we speak of and refer to (the art and practice of) meditation in this work, we're speaking 
of a practice from a theological and historical context that reaches well back into pre-history, as far back (at 
least) as the 3rd and 4th millennia BCE when we know the "Indo-Aryan" people were performing ceremonial 
and devotional worship, along with the recitation of hymns in some form of very old Vedic Sanskrit, evidence 
of which we find not only in the archeological evidence in that region of the world, the Northwestern part of 
the Indian subcontinent, but also in the literary tradition as preserved in the oldest strata of the Vedas, in the 
Rigvéda in particular.  The practice of meditation that we find outlined and described in the Yoga Sūtras, i.e. 
dhyāna is in a very real sense a crystallization, semantically and technically (spiritually speaking), of a very old 
set of practices that were fundamentally intertwined with the forms of worship of the "Indo-Aryans" that 
goes back millennium.  
What's unique about the description and usage of meditation (dhyāna) in the Yoga Sūtras then is not the idea 
or concept, or practice really, itself, but the fact that it is extrapolated from the underlying theological and 
mythical intellectual landscape from which it had been inextricably linked for so long.  With the introduction 
of the Yoga Sūtras, we have the practice defined in such a way that it can be used as a means to higher states 
of consciousness no matter what (devotional) symbols, or even theological or divine beliefs, that the 
practitioner brought to the method.  While the practices described and methods described in the Yoga Sūtras 
are no doubt spiritual, and in that sense theological or religious, they are not anthropomorphic in the 
Western sense (or even in the Indo-Aryan / Hindu sense) and for that reason the system can most certainly 
viewed as more philosophical than theological, just as Buddhism  can as well in fact.  In this sense, the art of 
meditation as it is defined in the Indian theo-philosophical tradition specifically, and as we use the term 
throughout this work as well, is considered to be, a Science of the mind" of sorts, to denote this altogether 
theologically independent nature of the practices therein.  
And yet at the same time, meditation in this context is still nonetheless theological - in the sense that the 
practices described should be understood, in their proper historical and intellectual context, as related to the 
direct perception and experience of the divine (theos).  Meditation as we use the term is also fundamentally 
ontological in the sense that the practice was designed, again in its original theo-philosophical context in 
antiquity, to facilitate the direct experience of "the ground of reality", the samādhi of Yoga or nirvana of 
Buddhism.  As such meditation at its core, from an ancient theo-philosophical perspective is an "ontological" 
pursuit, although not just an intellectual pursuit as the word ontological implies and denotes in modern 
western academic circles where the term originated, but ontological in a more mystical sense - here 
borrowing the term from modern western academic circles and expanding its definition to the ancient theo-
philosophical intellectual landscape which is the core part of Parts I and II of this work.
Mysticism then, and its associated arts and practices such as meditation, is used in the context of this work to 
signify the underlying belief systems which are reflected in the earliest theo-philosophical literary traditions 
throughout Eurasia in antiquity.  Theo-philosophical belief systems which emerge with the advent of writing 
which supports the ability to explore and define these belief systems in a much more sophisticated and 
comprehensive way than could be done prior to the advent of writing no doubt, but intellectual systems 
which nonetheless are characterized primarily by what we refer to as mythology and theology in modern 
Western academic literature.  But this distinction is misleading somewhat, at least with respect to how the 
ancients viewed the world, as these theo-philosophical belief systems were not considered separate domains 
of knowledge necessarily in antiquity - separate from physical or scientific reality - but reflected the very 
basic and elemental aspects of existence itself.  Even though this mystical knowledge was considered to be 
sacred in antiquity, and as such was necessarily kept "secret" and held within the hands of the very select 
few, the whole of reality from the ancient's perspective was considered sacred so this distinction of the 
sacred versus the non-sacred is misleading at best and altogether inaccurate and wrong at worst.  
So while this delineation of the mystical arts then, i.e. mysticism in general, is necessary in order to facilitate 
the discussion and analysis of these ancient belief systems within the classically Western intellectual, 
philosophical and altogether "scientific" perspective, this delineation or designation is essentially an artificial 
one that is superimposed by Wester academics (for good reason mind you), but most certainly does not 
reflect how the ancients viewed reality, i.e. their worldview.  For their reality, what came to be called 
knowledge specifically within the Hellenic theo-philosophical tradition , included the so-called "spirit world", 
the realm of the gods and the surrounding myths as it were.  And even in the Hellenic theo-philosophical 
tradition the mystery cults traditions were considered to be a fundamental aspect of this knowledge, even if 
it could not necessary be explained or articulated in a rational or logical way. 
And the very essence of this ancient mystical tradition, its most profound and systematic description as it 
were, is in the author's view at least, reflected most prolifically and, in the West at least, most influentially by 
the Indian theo-philosophical tradition of Yoga, a theo-philosophical belief system which for all intents and 
purposes underpins, and somewhat defines to a large extent, mysticism itself as it is understood again within 
the context of the modern Western intellectual landscape within which the term itself is to be understood.   
And within this theo-philosophical tradition, a Science of the mind has been defined and outlined, again 
independent of theological conceptions more or less, which has become widespread in the West and 
throughout the world in the last century or so and within which the ancient (mystical) art of meditation is 
defined and outlined in detail within the particular Indian theo-philosophical landscape form which it 
emerges.
It is from this perspective then - intellectually, historically and theo-philosophically - which the terms 
mysticism and meditation are used throughout this work, and it is within this context that we view and 
explore the life and teachings of Paramhamsa Ramakrishna as a mystic in the very ancient Indian theo-
philosophical sense, and as such a definitive example or embodiment, the illustrative truth as it were, of a 
very ancient belief system, a conception of reality and knowledge, that rests well beyond the domain of 
modern Western notions of reality, thereby forcing us to confront how we define reality itself within a 
Western intellectual and "scientific" context.  This is why we use the term ontology, throughout this work, 
and in particular in Part IV which deals with among other things the inherent challenges and problems of 
analyzing Ramakrishna's life and teachings, or mysticism in general for that matter, through a classically 
Western intellectual and metaphysical lens.