
One of, if not the, unique contributions of the Indo-Aryan people , to which Vedānta (the philosophical 
foundations of Hinduism) and Buddhism ultimately owe their heritage, is the importance they place, and 
fundamental belief in, what is variously referred to in the Western theological tradition as realization, 
liberation, or enlightenment, i.e. what the Buddhists call nirvana and what the Vedic tradition calls mokṣa.  All 
of these various terms are used to describe what the ancient Indo-Aryans, the people from which the great 
religion of the Hindus emerged from which Buddhism eventually emerges from, believed was not only the 
fundamental nature of reality itself, but also the fundamental nature of the Soul which they not only believed 
existed, but also believed that it was in fact eternal, that it was subject to rebirth, and that in its essential 
state it is non-differentiated form the eternal Soul, what the Upanishads refer to as Brahman.
The ancient Indo-Aryan civilization sprung forth in the Indus Valley region in modern day India and Pakistan 
(to the ancients Eastern Persia), and was the source of the Vedas, which represents according to some 
scholars some of the oldest literature of mankind.  This ancient Indus Valley civilization spread and flourished 
in the northwestern part of the Indian subcontinent from circa 3300 to 1300 BCE, roughly aligning with the 
advent of the ancient Sumerian civilization directly to the West and also the ancient Egyptian civilization even 
further West in North Africa.  One of the great unanswered and hotly disputed topics of the study of 
philosophy in antiquity is when in fact these Indo-Aryan belief systems emerged, when they can be "dated" 
within the historical timeline so to speak, and what level of influence they had, if any, on the development of 
theo-philosophical traditions in the West (as reflected in the Hellenic philosophical tradition for example) or 
to the Far East in what came to be known as China.  As of yet we have not found any archeological evidence 
of any contact between these disparate civilizations, nor do we have any real evidence of any contact 
between the Indo-Aryans and the ancient Chinese either, but the absence of evidence, and in particular in 
this case, is not necessarily evidence of absence.
The civilization from which Hinduism emerges is traditionally associated with the Indus Valley, a river system 
from which an ancient culture could grow crops and thrive, a similar relationship to the Sumerians and their 
Tigris-Euphrates and the Egyptians and their Nile.  This relationship with water and its fundamental existence 
and prerequisite feature for the source of life, clearly left its mark on the cosmogony and creation mythos of 
all of these ancient cultures and with the Indo-Aryans we find traces of the belief in universal emanation from 
a watery abyss, i.e. āpas in Sanskrit, just as the Egyptians had their concept of nu and the Ancient Sumerians 
had their Apsû.
While one can argue that given the basic and fundamentally similar nature of these cosmogonic belief 
systems - beliefs that permeated not only the Mediterranean peoples but also the Sumer-Babylonians, the 
Indo-Aryans, and even the Chinese - that all of these traditions stemmed from a single, very ancient and pre-
historic mythological narrative that followed the migration of ancient man out of Africa (roughly 60,000 years 
ago) and followed the migration path of early man as they spread to the East over the Eurasian continent in 
wave after wave of migrations, a much more plausible argument however would seem to be, is that the 
similarities in the cosmogonic and theogonic narratives of all these ancient peoples stems primarily from the 
fact that each of these individual cultures and societies was presented with similar challenges, experiences 
and relationships with their environment which ultimately held away over, and governed their existence and 
sustenance, out of which emerged their respective mythos and various theo-philosophical systems of belief.  
This argument basically rests on the belief that it is from these common experiences, both in terms of the 
relationship with their environment and the ensuing socio-political challenges that evolved as their societies 
advanced - again given their common experience and common psychological constitution, which in each case 
was defined by their relationship with the river system and other natural surroundings that their respective 
civilization depended upon for survival - is ultimately the source of the similarities of the mythos and 
cosmogonic narratives of all of these ancient peoples.  For it is definitely true that in each case the river 
system within which each of these great ancient civilizations emerged from and depended upon, was not 
only the source of their food and sustenance, their way of life really, but it also framed their idea of the 
passage of time and their sense of "order". 
Right in the middle of this argument as it were, not just theoretically speaking but actually geographically as 
well, sits the Indo-Aryan people and the theo-philosophical systems attributed to them and their 
descendants.  The common mythos across the ancient civilizations of Eurasia has already been analyzed in 
detail, but as we search for a deeper meaning behind these ancient creation narratives, or at least the 
meaning they had to the ancient authors and interpreters of the various traditions, it is to the subsequent 
theo-philosophical systems which emerged out of the respective traditions themselves that we must look to - 
and for the Indo-Aryans this is Vedānta, or literally, the "end of the Vedas".
The Vedas represent not just the earliest records of the theology, sacrifices, hymns and practices of the Indo-
Aryans, but they also represent one of the earliest compiled works of literature and intellectual records of 
civilized man.  The Sanskrit word véda means knowledge or wisdom and is derived from the root vid, "to 
know".  Like many other religious traditions, the Vedas are believed to have been revealed directly to the 
ancient rishis, or "seers", directly from Brahmā, the ancient Creator god of the Hindus, and passed down 
from generation to generation from teacher to student in a long standing oral tradition and then 
documented and transcribed by scholars and sages toward the end of the first millennium BCE.  
While alphabetic writing does not appear in the archeological record in the Indian subcontinent before the 
3rd century BC in the form of the Brāhmī script, a derivative of the Phoenician alphabet just as the ancient 
Greek alphabet system is, the Vedas were not actually written down until centuries later, being captured and 
passed down from generation to generation via the classic oral method, hence the nature of the text in verse 
which makes it much easier to memorize and record accurately.  It is primarily form the linguistic evidence as 
reflected in the compiled works themselves that the date of composition of the earliest portion of the Vedas 
is believed to have occurred in the middle of the second millennium BCE give or take (c. 1500-1100 BCE), 
which means that the verses were orally transmitted for some 1500 years or so until they were finally written 
down in the first few centuries CE.   
The Vedas are the oldest Indo-Aryan Sanskrit texts and are the oldest extant Hindu scripture.  Sanskrit was 
the primary liturgical language of Hinduism and its offshoots Buddhism and Jainism and virtually all of the 
ancient texts of these religions were authored in Sanskrit.  Sanskrit's position in the cultures of Greater 
India is akin to that of Latin and Greek in Europe and it has significantly influenced most modern languages of 
the Indian subcontinent, particularly in India, Pakistan, Srī Lanka and Nepal.  The pre-classical form of Sanskrit 
is known as Vedic Sanskrit, and it was the language used in the Rigvéda.  This qualifies Vedic Sanskrit as one 
of the oldest attestations of any Indo-Iranian language, and one of the earliest attested members of the Indo-
European language family, the family which includes English and most European languages.
The corpus of Vedic texts, all transcribed in some form of Sanskrit, are classically divided into Samhita 
portions, which are collections of mantras from the four Vedas, the Brāhmaṇas, which are prose texts that 
describe Hindu sacrifice and ritual, and some of the older Upanishads which deal specifically with the 
meaning behind the rituals and the nature of knowledge and reality.  Each of the Brāhmaṇas is associated 
with one of the Samhitas and may also include Āranyakas, literally "forest texts", as well as one or more 
Upanishads.
The Vedas are a vast set of literature, typically classified into four sets of books or categories, the most 
ancient of which is the Rigvéda, a collection of over 1000 (Vedic) Sanskrit hymns written in the oldest form of 
language known to the be associated with the Indo-Aryan people from antiquity, namely Vedic Sanskrit which 
is closely related to the language recorded in the Avesta literature of the Iranian/Persians, i.e. Indo-Iranians.  
The Rigvéda, give us glimpses into the life of the Indo-Aryan people who first settled and formed complex 
societies in the Indus Valley region some seven thousand years or so ago, and is also the primary source 
material of the mythology, rituals and belief systems of these pre-historic people.  The Rigvéda is classically 
organized into ten books, called mandalas in Sanskrit, and consists mostly of lyric poems and hymns 
dedicated to various deities, chief of whom is Indra, the leader of the ancient Indo-Aryan pantheon. 
The other three Vedas, which are of similar structure, style and content as the Rigvéda speaking to consistent 
theo-theo-philosophical tradition which they represent, are the Samaveda, which is a collection of hymns and 
verses organized in a similar manner as the Rigvéda and which includes verses and hymns which are for the 
most part also found in the Rigvéda as well, the Yajurveda which is primarily a compilation of ritualistic 
formulas and offerings that are to be perfumed as part of the yajña  fire sacrifice ritual, and the latest 
compilation of the four the Atharvaveda, which contains prose and poems verses related to various cultural 
and day to day rites and rituals which pertain to various medicinal, cultural and socio-political matters, 
including passages which discuss the meaning of ritual itself, i.e. the Upanishadic portions.  
The Samaveda, Yajurveda and Atharvaveda are of similar structure, style and content of the Rigvéda, and in 
many cases (like the Samaveda for example), include much of the same material that is to be found in the 
Rigvéda itself, speaking to the existence in Indo-Aryan antiquity of several different "schools" of thought, to 
use that term broadly, which all stemmed from the same original source material as it were, the oldest 
stratum of which can be found in the Rigvéda, but at the same time had different areas of emphasis and 
different traditions that were encapsulated in their respective "redactions" or "versions" of Vedic lore.   
While all three are believed to be of later composition than the Rigvéda, but nonetheless all are believed to 
have arrived at their existing form more or less by the middle of the first millennium BCE, thereby 
establishing an Indo-Aryan Vedic period of history which runs roughly form the beginning of the 2nd 
millennium BCE to 500 BCE or so and which aligns with the composition of the Vedas.  Nonetheless, all four 
of the Vedas are considered part of the Hindu theo-philosophical canon as it were and the subsequent 
various philosophical developments that emerge from ancient India are delineated along the lines as to 
whether or not the Vedas are appealed to as authoritative scripture. 
The Vedas represent a core part of the Indo-Aryan theo-philosophical belief system from a very early stage of 
their civilization development and in the latter half of the first millennium BCE their social structure was 
architected to reflect this; namely the sacred teachings of the Vedas were to be preserved and taught by a 
learned, priestly class of society, i.e. the Brahmins, while the ruling or governing of society was to be 
performed by the Kshatriyas (or warrior class), the herders, farmers, merchants and traders were delineated 
in the Vaishyas class, and the servants or working class was given the denomination of the Shudras.  Traces of 
this stratification, what has come to be known as the Hindu caste system, can be found in the Rigvéda and 
the Purāṇas, but is clarified and codified more distinctly in the Manusmriti, or Laws of Manu, which was 
compiled sometime between the 3rd century BCE and 2nd century CE, reflecting a later socio-political 
transformation of Indo-Aryan/Hindu society - later than the Vedic period that is.

Parts of the Brāhmaṇas, Āranyakas, as well as Upanishads explore what have become the theo-philosophical 
underpinnings of Hinduism, i.e. Vedānta.  In these works, we find the roots of Vedānta which rests 
fundamentally on such notions as Brahman, the absolute or underlying nature of the universe, and Ātman, or 
Self, the reflection of Brahman within the context of the individual psyche, or Soul.  However, it is within the 
Upanishadic corpus that we find the philosophical foundations of what later came to be known as Vedānta.
Much like the ancient scripture of the Hebrews in the Old Testament or the Zoroastrian Avesta, or even the 
classical Greek mythic traditions of Hesiod and Homer, the Upanishads and the rest of the Vedic scripture in 
toto represent an oral tradition that reaches deep into antiquity that was only later written down as writing 
became ubiquitous in the latter part of the first millennium BCE but nonetheless represents an intellectual, 
theological and "mystical" tradition that reaches far back into antiquity, at least as far back as the advent of 
Indo-Aryan civilization itself and its supposed shared roots with Indo-Iranian culture and civilization.
The Upanishads however, form the philosophical backbone of Vedānta.  The Sanskrit word Upanishad is 
derived from the Sanskrit root sad, which means to 'to loosen' or ''to attain' or even 'to annihilate', combined 
with the prefixes upa and ni, which denote 'nearness' or 'sitting beside' and 'totality' respectively.  You can 
therefore translate the meaning of upanishad to mean something along the lines of that which is attained 
completely and entirely whilst sitting beside or by.  As understood by Śaṅkara, one of the most influential 
Indian philosophers of all time from the 8th century CE, the term upanishad is in effect a veiled reference to 
the content of the Upanishads, namely Brahmavidyā, knowledge of Brahman, and Atmavidyā, knowledge of 
Self, or Ātman.  It is the fundamental unity of Ātman and Brahman that represents the core tenet of 
Upanishadic philosophy.   
Vedānta is the term used to describe the orthodox philosophy of the Hindus and is reflected most notably in 
the Upanishads, the portions of the Vedas that do not deal with sacrifice or ceremonial worship, i.e. karma or 
dharma, but deal with the true meaning and import behind the various sacrifices, rituals and hymns that are 
described in the Vedas - namely the nature of Brahman, or the World Soul, and its ultimate unity with Ātman, 
the individual Soul.  This literature focuses not on ritual or sacrifice, which represents the bulk of the Vedas in 
fact, but on the underlying meaning and import of said sacrifices and the fundamental nature of existence or 
reality.  
Vedānta however, while intellectually and culturally linked to the Vedas and Indo-Aryan theo-philosophy as a 
whole, expounds upon the more esoteric teachings of the Āranyakas and the Upanishads portion of the 
Vedas and are fundamentally "mystical" or theo-philosophical in nature.  These portions of the Vedas were 
intended for use not just by the Brahmins, or Indo-Aryan priests, but also by renunciate practitioners, i.e. the 
"forest dwellers" as well as a means to understand, or comprehend, the true import and relevance of the 
Vedas as understood by the rishis, the original authors of the Vedas from deep antiquity.  
Although in antiquity Vedānta referred more specifically to the philosophic portion of the Vedas, the bulk of 
the content coming from the Upanishads, over time Vedānta took on a broader meaning to represent the 
body of work and knowledge that in toto interpreted the "meaning" of the Upanishads.  As such, the three 
primary sources of Vedānta as a distinctly Indian theo-philosophical system are:
1)	the Upanishads, representing the end of the Vedas or the philosophical and mystical portions of the 
Vedas, 
2)	the Bhagavad Gītā or "Song of the Lord" from the epic poem the Mahābhārata, and 
3)	the Brahmā Sūtras which was an attempt at consolidating and synthesizing Vedic philosophy from 
the 2nd or third century CE. 

The first attempt at compiling and synthesizing the teachings of Vedānta, their interpretation as it were, is 
contained in the Brahmā Sūtras (sometimes referred to as the Vedānta Sūtras) which are believed to have 
been written somewhere around the 2nd century CE.  The Brahmā Sūtras are part of the Uttara-Mīmāṃsā 
(Vedantic) tradition and are in essence a summary and compilation of the teachings of the Upanishads.  It is 
in the Brahmā Sūtras that the teachings of Vedānta are set forth in a systematic and logical order, rather than 
the scattered and somewhat inconsistent manner which the teachings are presented in the Vedas and the 
Upanishads given their deep historical and sometimes esoteric roots and their focus on sacrifice and 
ceremonial worship.
The Bhagavad Gītā, or the "Song of the Lord" has also, from a theo-philosophical standpoint, played a 
significant role in the development of Vedic thought over the centuries.  The text is a part of the ancient 
Sanskrit epic called the Mahābhārata, of which some of its oldest parts date from the middle or early part of 
the first millennium BCE, and is undoubtedly one of the greatest epics of all time and is commensurate in 
stature and influence in the Hindu and Indian tradition as the Iliad or the Odyssey are in the Western 
intellectual tradition.  The Bhagavad Gītā is a portion of this mythological epic text and is a narrative of a 
dialogue between Lord Krishna and Prince Arjuna that takes place on the eve of a great battle of the 
Kurukshetra War.
Arjuna, whose name means "bright" or "shining", is one of the five Pandava brothers, all sons of Pandu, who 
are aligned against their cousins the Kauravas, descendants of Kuru, in a great civil conflict that is ravaging 
the nation.  On the eve of this great battle, a battle between cousins and brothers, Arjuna voices to Lord 
Krishna his great reservations and doubts about the righteousness of the war in general, and more 
specifically the duty he has as a warrior to kill and fight to protect his family and his country in the name of 
"righteousness".  Krishna, Arjuna's charioteer, uses this stage as the pedestal from which he gives his great 
teaching regarding the nature of the Soul (jiva), the importance of duty (dharma), the path(s) to liberation 
(mokṣa), the true meaning of knowledge (jnana), the importance of devotion (bhakti), and the ultimate 
grounding of all things and beings in the all-pervading Brahman in order to motivate and inspire Arjuna to 
perform his duty, his dharma, and fight. 
In the Bhagavad Gītā, Krishna helps Arjuna understand why he must fight, and why it is morally right for him 
to do so, and his teaching comes to represent a key aspect of Vedānta philosophy as it is interpreted in the 
Indian philosophical tradition.  In the process of his expositions, Lord Krishna expounds upon key Vedic 
philosophical constructs such as mokṣa (liberation), karma (action), and dharma (righteous conduct), forming 
the theo-philosophical foundations of not just Vedānta, but Yoga as well, and in the end helping Arjuna 
understand that while it may seem immoral for him to go to war with his kin, it is nonetheless his duty to do 
so and it would in fact be immoral to abstain from fighting. 
The very root of Vedānta however, rests in the philosophy of the Upanishads, a set of treatises attached to 
various portions of the Vedas that elucidated upon the true "meaning" of the Vedic rituals, and the 
underlying theo-philosophical system upon which it was based.  Albeit a later development than the Vedas 
proper from an intellectual perspective, it is within the Upanishads that we perhaps find the most prolific and 
poetic expression of Vedānta.  The philosophy of the Upanishads however is very esoteric, and in some cases 
can be seen to contradict itself, and to this end many scholars have debated the origins of the material as 
well as the philosophical implications of the verses themselves.  
In this context, the philosophy of Vedānta has three primary interpretative traditions, each of which although 
shares the basic semantic and theo-philosophical intellectual framework as established and put forth in the 
Upanishads and Brahmā Sūtras, nonetheless has its own unique perspective on the underlying metaphysics 
and theology as it were.  These three schools are Advaita Vedānta, Viśiṣṭādvaita Vedānta, and Dvaita 
Vedānta, founded by Śaṅkara, Ramanuja, and Madhvacharya respectively.
Probably the most lasting and influential of the three schools of Vedānta is the monistic, or non-dual, 
interpretative tradition which is referred to as Advaita Vedānta.  This tradition and set of teachings is 
reflected most profoundly and influentially by the 8th century Indian philosopher and theologian Ādi Śaṅkara, 
sometimes simply referred to as Śaṅkara.  

 
Figure 36: Ādi Śaṅkara with disciples.  By Raja Ravi Varma (1848 - 1906). 

According to Śaṅkara, Brahman is the only reality, and the (mis)conception of the reality of the physical world 
of distinct subjects and objects is caused by illusory power of Maya, the creative force, or "veil" as it is 
sometimes referred to as, which is an aspect of and function of Īśvara, the God of the Hindus, but not a 
fundamental attribute of reality itself.  It is Maya which is the underlying source and cause for the individual 
persona's (mis)conception to perceive any sort of separation or distinction between the Self or Soul, Ātman, 
and the all-pervading Brahman which represents not only the true underlying substratum of all existence of 
all animate or inanimate life, but also the very nature of Ātman itself.

The thought that what is not That is That grows up in the fool through darkness; because no discernment is 
there, it wells up, as the thought that a rope is a snake; thereupon a mighty multitude of fatuities fall on him 
who accepts this error, for he who grasps the unreal is bound; mark this, my companion. 


Advaita literally means "not two", or non-dual and hence the basic characterization of the theo-philosophical 
system as non-dualistic" or monistic.  Its primary tenet is the fundamental unity of not only Brahman and 
Ātman, but also that all of the physical universe, all cognitive beings in fact, are simply reflections of this all-
pervasive Brahman.  Since all of reality is simply and essentially Brahman, it cannot be said to possess any 
attributes per se, and it is only via the power of Maya, that our perception of the physical world "seems" real.  
As such, it is the ignorance of this true reality that lies both within and beyond the world governed by Maya 
that is the ultimate cause of all suffering and misery in the world.  Therefore, it is through Knowledge, and 
ultimately realization, of the true nature of Brahman - and in turn Ātman which is essentially equivalent to 
Brahman at its core - that liberation, mokṣa, and an end to the endless round of births and deaths, and the 
suffering thereof, which characterize human existence, is ultimately attained.  
The source of the concept of Īśvara, when looked at from this fundamentally non-dualistic and monistic 
perspective, stems from the inability of the individual Soul, i.e. the jiva, to grasp this very simple and yet at 
the same time very subtle and abstract concept of the existence of an all-pervading principle, i.e. Brahman, in 
a non-anthropomorphic way.  Therefore God, or Īśvara to the Hindus, while a helpful and relevant construct 
to help us appreciate and come to understand and recognize the "unknowable", nonetheless also owes its 
existence to Maya, the grand illusion.  God, as well as the entire physical world itself in fact, are both equally 
illusory when looked at from the perspective of full realization and understanding of Brahman, i.e. jnana or 
Knowledge in the most abstract and fullest sense of the term.  
Again, from a theo-philosophical standpoint, according to Advaita Vedānta, there is not only no difference 
between the individual Soul, i.e. Ātman, and the fundamental underlying stratum of existence, i.e. Brahman, 
but in fact ultimately there exists nothing else except Brahman, and it is only through thorough and complete 
knowledge and understanding, i.e. mokṣa, of this basic characteristic of existence that one's Soul can be truly 
liberated.
Viśiṣṭādvaita Vedānta - literally Advaita (i.e. "not two") combined with "uniqueness" or qualifications - as 
expounded by Ramanuja in the 11th and 12th centuries AD, is also a non-dualistic Vedantic school, but 
scholars mostly refer to this philosophical system as qualified non-dualism, as opposed to the pure non-
dualism of Śaṅkara.  The main difference between this school of thought and Advaita Vedānta is 
that Brahman is asserted to have real attributes or characteristics that have some level of existence in reality. 
This Brahman with attributes is typically referred to as Saguna Brahman, and include such qualities such as 
the individual Soul as well as inanimate matter, i.e. the physical world.  Viśiṣṭādvaita argues that while it is 
true that Brahman alone is real, but that it is also true that Brahman has real, concrete attributes which can 
be said to exist.  These basic attributes, or qualities, are differentiated forms or manifestations of Brahman 
and are also real, i.e. are not illusory as postulated by Advaita Vedānta.   Viśiṣṭādvaita Vedānta ultimately 
asserts the reality of the physical world, and the Soul, despite the basic truth and reality of the 
undifferentiated and all-pervading Brahman which underpins all of physical existence or reality.  
From this qualified non-dualistic perspective, Brahman, matter, and Soul, are in fact all distinct from each 
other from a relative standpoint, even though they are in essence inseparable entities and reflections of the 
indivisible Brahman  In this conception of Vedānta then, Brahman is said to have "attributes", and yet at the 
same time is also "attributeless" - both statements and perspectives are true and valid, i.e. they are not 
mutually exclusive concepts, and they depends upon one's perspective.  Ramanuja argues that all of the main 
treatises of Vedānta - namely the Upanishads, the Bhagavad Gītā and the Brahmā Sūtras - can only be 
interpreted in this way, i.e. that there is unity in diversity, and that Brahman is both with attributes and 
without attributes at the same time and that therefore the physical world and our concept of individuality, as 
reflected in our concept of the Soul (i.e. the jiva) is in fact "real" from a relative standpoint.  This school puts 
forth that it is not through knowledge, jnana, that the easiest and best path to liberation (mokṣa) lay, but 
through bhakti, or the path of "devotion", to God (as represented by Viṣṇu), along with the notion of self-
surrender, that are the clearest and best path to liberation.
Dvaita Vedānta, or the dualistic school of Vedānta, was founded by Madhwāchārya in the 13th century and 
probably comes closest to our Western conception of God and the world as we understand it in the 
Abrahamic theological context.  Dvaita Vedānta differs from the Advaita and Viśiṣṭādvaita schools in that it 
identifies Viṣṇu directly with Brahman completely and in so doing fundamentally asserts the existence of God 
as a creative and preserving entity and benefactor of the universe.  That is to say, God as a creative principle 
is not an abstract construct per se, but is a real existing entity.  At the same time also admits to, and asserts 
the fundamental reality of, the physical world and the world of the Soul as well.  
Dvaita Vedānta asserts that Viṣṇu is not only metaphysically equivalent and indistinguishable from Brahman, 
and that this entity does in fact exist as the Supreme Self, it also (like Viśiṣṭādvaita Vedānta) asserts that this 
Supreme Self does indeed have "real" attributes which also "exists", i.e. the notion of Saguna Brahman.  But 
it also asserts, and this is what distinguished it from the other two predominant schools of Vedānta 
philosophy, that the best and truest, and in fact only, interpretation of Vedānta scripture as a whole from a 
theo-philosophical perspective is that while this Supreme Self does in fact "exist", it's "essential nature" is 
fundamentally different from the essential nature of individual souls (jīvātmans) and the physical world in 
toto.  
In this light, it regards Brahman, all matter, and the individual Soul as eternally existent and mutually 
separate entities, as opposed to a manifestation of the one eternal substance or essence of Brahman as is 
reflected in the qualified non-dualistic and non-dualistic schools of Vedānta.  This fundamental characteristic 
of the world, its wholly distinct and separate (albeit somewhat dependent) existence on Brahman, is unique 
to Dvaita Vedānta, hence the dualistic nature of the theo-philosophical system.
In this form of Vedānta, sentient beings are but shadows, or images, of the divine, i.e. the Supreme Self as 
Viṣṇu or Brahman,  but at the same time are not constituted or made up of the same essential substance 
and in this respect are not "identical" with Brahman as is asserted by the non-dualistic and qualified non-
dualistic schools of Vedānta.  Given that the sentient and physical world that we as individuals, i.e. jivas, 
inhabit and live in, and (ultimately) are to be liberated from, is distinctive and unique in nature relative to the 
nature of the Supreme Self, this school also advocates bhakti, devotion and worship of the Supreme Self as 
manifest in Lord Viṣṇu or Brahman, as the best and clearest route to liberation.  But, distinct from 
Viśiṣṭādvaita Vedānta, it further expands upon this notion of bhakti to include the concept of hatred or 
separateness (dvesha), and indifference towards the Lord, which will lead the jiva to eternal hell and eternal 
bondage respectively, very much akin to the notion of heaven and hell that we find in the Judeo-Christian 
and Islamic theological traditions in fact. 
In the non-dualistic and qualified non-dualistic schools of Vedānta, liberation is ultimately achieved through 
knowledge or, and full communion with, Brahman as conceived of as the all-pervading substratum of 
existence.  This knowledge is called Brahmavidyā, or literally knowledge of Brahman, and is fundamentally 
revelatory in nature, whether such revelation comes through knowledge, jnana, as put forth by Advaita 
Vedānta, or via a path of devotion and worship, bhakti, as put forth by Viśiṣṭādvaita Vedānta.  Fundamental 
to the all of the different variants of Vedānta however, and consistent with any reading and interpretation of 
the Brahmā Sūtras the Upanishads or the Bhagavad Gītā, is the establishment of the importance of self-
realization and liberation, i.e. mokṣa, as the goal and end, i.e. purpose, of life.  And furthermore, regardless of 
the school of interpretation, be it dualistic, non-dualistic or qualified non-dualistic, it is Brahman as an 
abstract theo-philosophical construct, again as reflected in the underlying literature of the system itself, that 
represents the universal spirit that underlies all of the cosmos and all of its creation. 

The characteristic Indian theo-philosophical system of Vedānta, as seen through the lens of any of the three 
primary schools in their respective nuanced metaphysical and theological conception of the meaning of life 
and the nature of existence as reflected in the Upanishads, the Brahmā Sūtras and the Bhagavad Gītā, 
applies both a rational and cohesive structure to the extensive, esoteric and vast corpus of Vedic "scripture".  
Each of the schools, despite their differences, all look to the Vedas as the ultimate source of Truth and 
believe them to have been "revealed" and compiled by the rishis, or seers, from antiquity, as well as believe 
them to be co-existent and co-emergent with the universe itself.  
Vedānta philosophy in this context represents not just the pinnacle of the Indian intellect, but also one of, if 
not the, greatest and lasting contributions of the Indian or Indo-Aryan culture as a whole - one of the most 
lasting and persistent in the entire world - to the theo-philosophical legacy of mankind.  Vedānta as a theo-
philosophical system establishes not only the intellectual and metaphysical basis for the direct experience of 
the divine through the vehicle of the Soul (Ātman), i.e. what is referred to as "communion" in the Western 
theological tradition, but also the intellectual and metaphysical context within which the reality of the 
physical world, as well as the existence of the Soul (Ātman) along with the meaning of life, can be altogether 
understood.  This theo-philosophical tradition from inception in deep antiquity, consistent with the theo-
philosophical development in the West in antiquity in fact, recognized the existence of Brahman, or God, as 
well as the Soul, and lays out in painstaking detail and clarity the connection between the two, as well as the 
means by which the goal of life, mokṣa or liberation, is to be pursued and ultimately achieved. 
While the Indo-Aryan theo-philosophical tradition as reflected by the Vedas is steeped in ritual no doubt, 
rituals and practices that persist to this day in fact, but the tradition also developed a comprehensive and 
thorough approach to ascribe "meaning" to these ancient rituals and rites, establishing a parallel and yet still 
ultimately interconnected and synthesized "interpretation" of the rituals, rites and practices which were and 
still remain such a fundamental and profound aspect of Indian culture and society.  Brahman then, as 
conceived by the Hindus, is a self-evident construct that was as old as civilization itself, in fact as old as 
mankind.  It was the Chaos of the Greeks, the Nu of the Egyptians and the Apsû of the Sumerian cultures.  But 
the Hindu religious tradition, and in particular in the theo-philosophical tradition that has come to be known 
as Vedānta, built upon this archaic and anthropomorphic conception of the universe and humanity and 
expanded upon it, reasonably and logically and for the most part bereft of religious dogma.  
Vedānta professes quite specifically that God, Brahman, can in fact be "realized", not just as a philosophical 
or intellectual construct, but as a fundamental aspect of life itself and that which ultimately gives human life 
meaning and distinguishes mankind from the rest of the species on the planet.  Vedānta holds that not only 
can God be realized and "perceived" or "seen" in an analogous way as the physical world is "perceived" and 
that, in its purest and highest form as expressed by Advaita Vedānta by Śaṅkara, that the pinnacle of 
knowledge itself is recognizing this all-pervasive "reality".  
And to this end, it's important to understand the source of this knowledge, i.e. Vedānta, is from the eternally 
revealed Vedas themselves, the theo-philosophy being embedded and encoded in the Indo-Aryan mythos as 
it were.  With Vedānta we find, like its cousin theo-philosophical system Buddhism, not only a rational 
approach to the nature of the Soul and its place within the cosmic and universal spectrum of existence, but 
also specific practices for revealing its true nature.  Furthermore, Vedānta just as Aristotle does to the West 
without the so-called mystic or idealist element of Plato which he abandoned, also provides a cohesive and 
comprehensive system of metaphysics from within which the entire universal existence, and of course 
mankind's place within it, can be understood, with critical importance held for a sense of purpose and value 
within the system itself.
In this context then, Indian theo-philosophy can be seen as much more integrated with their overall world 
view and their history as a culture and society that reaches far back into antiquity, and persisted, like the 
Chinese, as their civilization evolved and developed.  This is reflected not only in Hinduism, which of course is 
the name given to the "religion" of the Indo-Aryan people, but also in Jainism and Buddhism as well which 
although are "unorthodox" traditions, i.e. heterodox, in the sense that they do not profess the validity and 
truth of the Vedas, they nonetheless are offshoots of this same intellectual development and profess,  
consistent with Vedānta more or less, the unity of the Soul with the Absolute.
The system of belief which rested on the indivisible nature of the Soul and its integral nature with the source 
of all things was kept alive in Indian society in a more pure form of religious thought that was divorced from 
politics and power which was in some sense juxtaposed with its counterparts to the West.  It was protected 
by the personification of these ideas in the likes of Krishna, Buddha and others, and kept alive in the 
monastic, renunciate societies that interpreted the scriptures for the purposes of illumination and realization 
rather than for the establishment of authority or power.  In Vedānta, metaphysics is baked into it and well 
documented in the theological tradition from the very beginning, whereas to the West the metaphysics, 
theo-philosophy, developed independent of the religious traditions per se.  Furthermore, also unique to 
Vedānta as looked at as an example of a broad and robust theo-philosophical framework rather than simply 
the core foundation of the religion of Hinduism, you have a tradition that to a great extent continues to 
flourish today thanks to its reincarnation with the teachings of Vivekananda and the Ramakrishna Order 
which was founded in the twentieth century, culminating in many new translations of the old Vedic texts and 
their subsequent commentaries.  In contrast, the Western intellectual tradition as reflected in the Hellenic 
philosophical tradition, as primarily reflected in the works of Plato and Aristotle, was swallowed by 
Christianity (and Islam) in the second half of the first millennium CE and doesn't have a following or modern 
interpretation as does Vedānta, and its sister tradition of Yoga, today. 
In Hinduism then, and in its branches like Buddhism (for Buddhism is to the Hindus what Judaism is to the 
Christians, Buddha was a Hindu like Jesus was a Jew) presumed this fundamental distinction between church 
and state, or perhaps more aptly put this individuation (to borrow a Jungian term) of religion.  The Hindus did 
not codify these separation principles into law per se, as has been done in modern American and European 
society (i.e. the West) after centuries of religious persecution, but the principle of religious freedom 
represented a core, integral part of Hindu culture just the same.  
And from this social acceptance of the individual expression of the divine, many great sages and seers, known 
as rishis, had been born since the dawn of man that perennially personified this apex and goal of the Hindu 
religious system - namely the realization of the divine in this very life.  The Indo-Aryan theological tradition 
(which includes Buddhism and Yoga as well as Hinduism/ Vedānta) more so than any other allows for, and in 
fact insists upon, the existence of sages and seers throughout history who literally incarnate the divine and 
eternal truth underlying the universe and re-establish the core tenets of the Vedas, translating the eternal 
message for each era and each people as the need arises.  Krishna, Buddha, and Chaitanya, Ramakrishna and 
countless others are examples of incarnations where God himself is believed to have taken human form to 
shed light upon the mysteries of the universe. 
These great sages, these rishis, personified the goal of oneness with the divine, the perception of the 
kingdom of heaven within, and realized the end of the Hindu scriptures.  And they all accomplished this in 
their own unique way and yet at the same time each of them reestablished the validity of these ancient 
scriptures, renewing the people's faith in their content and precepts which had been born so many 
thousands of years prior.  To all of these great sages the mind and body, and reason and logic itself, was to be 
used to realize the truth of this oneness.  That was its sole purpose of existence.  This truth was the great gift 
that was handed down from the ages from the Vedas.  
Christianity and Islam, much later religious developments, incorporated some of the metaphysical and 
philosophical traditions that came before them, namely Hellenic philosophy, but for the most part operate 
independently of these theo-philosophical traditions in that although some great Christian and Muslim 
theologians refer to and incorporate some of the Greek philosophical works, they are altogether usurped and 
modified within their respective religious frameworks in what can only be considered to be a bastardized and 
utilitarian form.  Not so in the Eastern religious and pseudo-mystical traditions, or at least not nearly to the 
same extent.  For example, in modern India, despite its conquest over the millennia by a long list of cultures 
and their representative religions (Muslim, Christian, etc.), retains a well-established and long standing 
tradition of spiritual and theological freedom from within which many religious practices and theological 
traditions have flourished alongside each other for centuries, stemming no doubt from the richness and 
depth of the teachings of the Vedas with their focus on religious practices being tools for individual 
realization rather than the avoidance of damnation in eternal hell and the notion of original sin, the 
combination of which perhaps represent some of the most misunderstood and destructive forces of these 
popular Abrahamic religions.