
In today's world, you don't have to go very far, or have too far out a view on the world, in order to be 
exposed to Yoga.  Yoga is looked upon in the West today primarily as a means to better health, and 
(primarily) as a means to a better and more elegant body.  The pursuit of the peace and tranquility of the 
calmed mind is somewhat of an afterthought in modern day Yoga although the nature of mind and the 
practices for calming it are baked into the very heart of Yoga as it was originally conceived.  Although 
meditation and its offshoots do have a place in the modern practice of Yoga even if it is de-emphasized 
relative to the roots of the tradition, the practices inherent in Yoga of old have not been completely lost.  
The word Yoga derives from the Vedic Sanskrit root verb yuj, which means to "add", " join", "unite" or 
"attach", or literally "yoke" in the most literal sense.  According to Vyasa, the author of the first extant 
commentary on the Yoga Sūtras, Yoga is synonymous with samādhi, the end goal of Patañjali's theo-
philosophical system, and as such its etymology is properly traced back to yuj samādhau, which means "to 
concentrate".   The term has come to imply and mean "union" within the context of union with the divine, 
or alternatively as signifying a path to the union with the divine, as in Karma Yoga, Bhakti Yoga or Raja Yoga 
each of which is not synonymous with Yoga as outlined by Patañjali per se but nonetheless are related in kind 
to the system of philosophy called Yoga in its underlying purpose and content.
While Yoga is typically associated with specific "physical" practices such as postures, i.e. āsanas, and/or 
breathing exercises, i.e. prāṇāyāma, the identification of "Yoga" with these practices is somewhat misleading 
and is certainly inadequate from a theo-philosophical standpoint.  Yoga as an "orthodox" system of Indian 
philosophy originates from a treatise attributed to the sage Patañjali from 3rd/4th century CE called the Yoga 
Sūtras of Patañjali, or sometimes simply referred to as the Yoga Sūtras.  It is a set of 196 verses, or sūtras 
(literally "threads"), which outline a specific set of guidelines and practices for the attainment of samādhi, 
the highest state of concentration and mokṣa, or "freedom" which according to Patañjali is the end goal of 
life.
Yoga from a theo-philosophical perspective is very closely related Sāṃkhya philosophy, one of the other six 
orthodox Indian philosophical schools.  And while the two theo-philosophical systems are distinct from a 
certain academic vantage point, both however rest and look to the Vedas as the ultimate guide for 
knowledge and truth (as does Vedānta).  Yoga, as outlined by Patañjali in the Yoga Sūtras, while outlining a 
unique set of practices for living "rightly" or "properly", very similar to Buddha's Eightfold Noble Path in fact, 
is typically understood and interpreted through the lens of Sāṃkhya philosophy, resting as it were upon the 
same underling metaphysical and theo-philosophical perspective as Sāṃkhya philosophy for the most part, 
even though there do exist some subtle differences in perspective. 
Sāṃkhya philosophy as a school predates and underpins Yoga, and references to Kapila, its founder, as well 
as the system of philosophy as a whole can be found in various texts from the middle of the second half of 
the first millennium BCE, some half a century at least before Patañjali.  It, as does Yoga, adheres to an 
epistemological framework which admits to knowledge as resting upon three basic principles: 1) Pratyakṣa or 
perception (both internal and external), 2) Anumāṇa or inference, i.e. the reaching of a conclusion based 
upon original assumptions and the application of rational logic, and 3) Śabda, or the word, testimony of 
experts, e.g. the Vedas.  
From a metaphysical and cosmological standpoint, Sāṃkhya sees the world as the combination and 
intermixing of two basic and fundamental principles.  The first is the all-pervading consciousness or spirit 
which underlies the entire universe, both inanimate and animate "beings" called Puruṣa.  Puruṣa is the 
underlying ground of existence, the primordial first principle as it were, and the roots of the concept of 
Puruṣa can be found in the Vedas themselves.  

1. A THOUSAND heads hath Puruṣa, a thousand eyes, a thousand feet. 
On every side pervading earth he fills a space ten fingers wide. 
2 This Puruṣa is all that yet hath been and all that is to be; 
The Lord of Immortality which waxes greater still by food. 
3 So mighty is his greatness; yea, greater than this is Puruṣa. 
All creatures are one-fourth of him, three-fourths eternal life in heaven. 
4 With three-fourths Puruṣa went up: one-fourth of him again was here. 
Thence he strode out to every side over what cats not and what cats. 
5 From him Virāj was born; again Puruṣa from Virāj was born. 
As soon as he was born he spread eastward and westward o'er the earth. 
6 When Gods prepared the sacrifice with Puruṣa as their offering, 
Its oil was spring, the holy gift was autumn; summer was the wood. 
7 They balmed as victim on the grass Puruṣa born in earliest time. 
With him the Deities and all Sādhyas and Ṛṣis sacrificed. 
8 From that great general sacrifice the dripping fat was gathered up. 
He formed the creatures of-the air, and animals both wild and tame. 
9 From that great general sacrifice Ṛcas and Sāma-hymns were born: 
Therefrom were spells and charms produced; the Yajus had its birth from it. 
10 From it were horses born, from it all cattle with two rows of teeth: 
From it were generated kine, from it the goats and sheep were born. 
11 When they divided Puruṣa how many portions did they make? 
What do they call his mouth, his arms? What do they call his thighs and feet? 
12 The Brahman was his mouth, of both his arms was the Rājanya made. 
His thighs became the Vaiśya, from his feet the Śūdra was produced. 
13 The Moon was gendered from his mind, and from his eye the Sun had birth; 
Indra and Agni from his mouth were born, and Vāyu from his breath. 
14 Forth from his navel came mid-air the sky was fashioned from his head 
Earth from his feet, and from his car the regions. Thus they formed the worlds. 
15 Seven fencing-sticks had he, thrice seven layers of fuel were prepared, 
When the Gods, offering sacrifice, bound, as their victim, Puruṣa. 
16 Gods, sacrificing, sacrificed the victim these were the earliest holy ordinances. 
The Mighty Ones attained the height of heaven, there where the Sādhyas, Gods of old, are dwelling. 

One here finds that Puruṣa from a Vedic perspective is looked upon as a deity of sorts, we here see a hymn to 
"him", from the latest potion of the Rigvéda, Book X.  Even in the original, earliest conception of Puruṣa 
however, he/it is looked upon as the source of not just all the physical universe, but the source of the whole 
natural world as well as the social order and all mankind.  In Sāṃkhya philosophy, in its original conception as 
the metaphysical interpretation of the Vedas, Puruṣa becomes pure consciousness, or spirit, which is 
"transcendental" so to speak, although at the same time is not active in and of itself, and is not the primary 
constituent of the natural world.
It is the concept of Prakṛti, which literally means "nature", which is perceived to be the fundamental building 
block of the world as it were.  Prakṛti is the initial, or first cause, of the manifest universe and combines with 
Puruṣa in various forms and combinations to make up the universe as we know and perceive it in all its forms.  
In Sāṃkhya philosophy Prakṛti is looked upon as consisting of three basic attributes called gunas, which 
represent the basic aspects or characteristics which underlie everything in the universe.  These three gunas 
are Sattva, which signifies tranquility or lightness, Rajas which signifies activity or excitement, and Tamas 
which signifies inertia of heaviness.  
It is important to understand that Sāṃkhya philosophy looks upon the universe not just as a physical 
construct, that which can be perceived by the senses, but also understood as consisting of mind and spirit as 
well and as such this is a fundamental difference between it and virtually all forms of later Western 
philosophy .  In this context, while the Soul and mind are looked upon from a metaphysical perspective as 
manifestations of Prakṛti as well, the jiva is believed to consist of a synthesis and combination of Puruṣa and 
Prakṛti, the former being the source of intelligence and order, the primordial male principle in the universe, 
and the latter being the primordial essence of all matter, the female, or receptive, cosmic principle upon 
which Puruṣa acts.
In this context, it is Sattva that is looked upon as the finest and most subtle of "elements" of nature that is to 
be actively cultivated from a psychological standpoint in order to promote and facilitate the release the jiva 
or Soul from bondage.  This state off delusion, or misconception, is referred to in Sāṃkhya philosophy as 
saṃsāra, which although is literally translated as "wandering" or "world", it carries with it connotations of 
constant fluctuation or cyclical change.   The source of saṃsāra, and the means by which mokṣa is 
ultimately attained, is by the proper and correct understanding of the nature of the jiva within the universal 
order of Puruṣa and Prakṛti, i.e. one's true and complete identification with Puruṣa as the true and primordial 
state of being or existence.
In this context Sāṃkhya philosophy is typically understood as being atheistic, although perhaps a better term 
is "naturalistic", even though even this term is not necessarily inclusive enough to provide the complete 
conception of "Nature" within the context of Sāṃkhya philosophy.  In this sense, the system does not 
necessarily deny the existence of an anthropomorphic God or deity (Īśvara) but perhaps better put, as it 
believes the universe to be a manifestation of Puruṣa and Prakṛti in various combinations and forms and as 
such does not require the existence of any specific deity or God to create or preserve the universal order and 
therefore looks upon God, or Īśvara, as a human construct that from a metaphysical standpoint has no "real" 
existence.  Swami Vivekananda explains it thus:

Next, Sāṃkhya says, that the manifestation of nature is for the soul; all combinations are for some third person.  
The combinations which you call nature, these constant changes are going on for the enjoyment of the soul, for 
its liberation, that it may gain all this experience from the lowest to the highest.  When it has gained it, the soul 
finds it was never in nature, that it was entirely separate, that it is indestructible, that it cannot go and come; 
that going to heaven and being born again were in nature, and not in the soul.  Thus the soul becomes free.  

All nature is working for the enjoyment and experience of the soul.  It is getting this experience in order to reach 
the goal, and that goal is freedom. But the souls are many according to the Sāṃkhya philosophy. There is an 
infinite number of souls. The other conclusion of Kapila [the founder of Sāṃkhya philosophy] is that there is no 
God as the Creator of the universe.  Nature is quite sufficient by itself to account for everything.  God is not 
necessary, says the Sāṃkhya. 

Saṃsāra then, has its origins in the false identification one's small self, or ego (ahamkara), that the jiva 
perceives itself as a separate and unique entity bound to a physical form which is subject to birth, growth, 
decay and ultimate death and destruction, characterized most emphatically by suffering and loss.  In this 
sense Sāṃkhya again shares many of the same characteristics of Buddhism (the notion of anātman in 
Sanskrit and anattā in Pāli, or "not-self") although its underlying philosophy, as well as the path which it lays 
out for liberation, is altogether distinct and unique.  
In Sāṃkhya philosophy, and in turn in its close cousin theo-philosophical systems of Yoga in its original 
conception as put forth by Patañjali, as well as in Vedānta in fact, mokṣa, or liberation, is conceived of as a 
state of being or consciousness that comes from a proper and complete understanding of the true nature of 
existence, and the true nature of self - jiva or Ātman - within the context of this "true state of affairs" so to 
speak, as understood by each of the respective metaphysical and theo-philosophical frameworks.   With 
Sāṃkhya philosophy, and to a lesser extent in Yoga, mokṣa is attained when the psychic and intellectual root 
of saṃsāra is removed when one's true identity with the underlying ground of existence, Puruṣa, is ultimately 
realized and experienced directly.  
It is from the standpoint of Sāṃkhya philosophy then, that the eight limbed practices (again ashtanga) 
outlined in the Yoga Sūtras are typically interpreted, the sum total of which - in a manner very similar to 
Buddha's Noble Eightfold Path - a specific methodology as it were, specific observances and practices, which 
when properly and cohesively developed and mastered will facilitate the attainment mokṣa.  

Yoga is defined in the Yoga Sūtras at the beginning of the work (Verse 1.2) as "yogaś citta-vṛtti-nirodhaḥ", 
which is translated (by Vivekananda) as "Yoga is the restraining (nirodhah) of the mind-stuff (citta) from 
taking various forms (vṛtti)".  As such, one must look at the entire theo-philosophical system as presented by 
Patañjali with this one goal in mind, even though related "results", i.e. the release of one from bondage or 
suffering, are undoubtedly considered to be key byproducts of the attainment of said goal.
Yoga as outlined by Patañjali emphasizes the importance of posture, āsana, control of the breath, 
prāṇāyāma, and concentration, dhāraṇā, all as key tools to be employed by the spiritual aspirant who wishes 
to be liberated from the bondage of phenomenal existence and ultimately to experience the pure state of 
consciousness itself, i.e. samādhi.  But what is commonly overlooked, particularly in the West, is that these 
physical and mental practices are grounded in a thorough and in many respects unyielding system of 
morality, ethics and observances that prepare the aspirant, provide the foundation for the aspirant, upon 
which the more advanced limbs of Yoga are based.  The first 2 limbs of Yoga reflect this focus on the 
necessary grounding of ethics and morality, the way to live, to prepare oneself for the path to liberation, 
namely yama and niyama.  
A proper understanding of Yoga yields the true import of both the means to the end as just as important, if 
not more so, as the end itself, and this is one of the characteristics of the traditional and original formulation 
of "Yoga" which distinguishes it from some of its modern variants such as Hatha Yoga or Kuṇḍalinī Yoga, both 
of which arguably have a much more "physical" or perhaps better put, "result driven" mindset or approach.  
In the case of Yoga proper however, the system which Vivekananda refers to as Raja Yoga, or "Royal Yoga", 
the focus is on the control and purification of the mind, the so-called "mental sheathe" of the jiva, or Soul, as 
juxtaposed with a focus on the so-called "physical sheathe" of the human form which is the primary focus of 
Hatha Yoga for example.  
However, in Patañjali's eight limbed system, the first four limbs in fact represent the requisite preparation of 
the mind-body system for the higher practices of mental withdrawal and concentration which the Western 
mind typically associates with meditation which culminates in the state of samādhi, the eighth limb of 
Patañjali's system.   The first "limb" of Yoga is yamas, which literally means to "reign in" or "curb", and 
consists of five basic moral or ethical precepts with which the practitioner must abide by, i.e. should preclude 
or refrain from doing.  These are 1) ahiṃsā which means "nonviolence", or the "non-harming" of other living 
beings , 2) satya which means "truthfulness" or the abstention from lying, 3) asteya or "non-stealing", 4) 
brahmacārya which can be loosely translated as "chastity", but more appropriately translates to "sexual 
restraint", and 5) aparigraha which means "non-possessiveness" or "non-attachment".  
This first limb is followed by the list of attributes or qualities which should be cultivated by the Yoga 
practitioner, i.e. the second limb of Patañjali's theo-philosophical system which is referred to as niyama, 
which literally means "positive duties, observances, or practices".  These are 1) sauca or "purity" of mind, 
speech and body, 2) santoṣa or "contentment", or "acceptance", 3) tapas, which comes from the root 
Sanskrit word for "fire" but in this context means austerity, self-discipline, or self-control, 4) svādhyāya, or 
"self-reflection" or "introspection", and 5) Īśvarapraṇidhāna which means "contemplation of God" or Īśvara, 
or from an Upanishadic philosophical context contemplation of the Supreme Self, i.e. Brahman. 
This list of observances and practices outlined in the first two limbs are followed by the third and fourth limbs 
which are what most Westerners typically associate with "Yoga" and which are the primary focus of Hatha 
Yoga.  These are āsana, which means literally "posture" or "seat", and prāṇāyāma, "breath" or "life force" 
control, both of which represent a set of physical practices to prepare the mind-body for the more advanced 
practices of mental attention, awareness and concentration (with which we typically associate with 
meditation proper) which are the subject and topic of the next three limbs of Patañjali's theo-philosophical 
system.
Asana and prāṇāyāma (literally control of breath or "life force", i.e. prāṇa) are followed by 
-	Pratyāhāra, which means the withdrawal of the senses from the external world into oneself (form 
the prefix prati which means "towards" and the root verb ahara which means "bring near, or 
"fetch"), 
-	Dhāraṇā, which means concentration or one-pointedness of mind, implying the concentration of the 
mind on a single physical object, deity or symbol, 
-	Dhyāna which is the steadfast and unwavering concentration on the object of meditation and 
concentration, and then finally
-	samādhi, where the distinction between the object of meditation and the meditator falls away and 
unity, i.e. the direct experience of Brahman

While the first and initial phase of meditation, pratyahara, the practitioner simply "withdraws" the senses 
from the external world, i.e. literally "brings the focus of attention within".  This is just the preliminary step 
along the road of meditation and represents, along with the first four limbs, a preparatory stage or phase as it 
were that begins to prepare the practitioner, the Yogi, for the more advanced and fully developed stages of 
meditation practice.  In the dhāraṇā phase the practitioner is meditating, but the concentration is still 
"wavering" so to speak, and is "broken" or "chunked" in phases of sorts.  That is to say, in this stage the 
concentration is not as unwavering and dedicated - like a candle that is glowing in a windless place - as is 
reflected in the more advanced stage of meditation practice which is referred to as dhyāna.  In this stage, the 
meditator and the object of meditation are unified and connected as it were in the state of concentration 
itself, in one single field of "awareness" as it were.  This stage can be looked upon in contrast to the earlier 
stage where the "subject" and "object" are still "perceived" as distinct entities.  
The final, and penultimate stage of Patañjali's theo-philosophical system is the experience of the state of 
samādhi, which is the direct perception, or experience, of pure consciousness, or Puruṣa, the so-called 
"ground of existence".  In this state, one does not conceive of themselves in any way as a distinct "being", but 
as fully integrated with the underlying ground of Being itself, or reality.  In this state, the concentration itself 
melts away as it were into a state of Being where the meditation practice itself, and its related subject and 
object dualism, falls away and is fully synthesized into a single field of "experience".  
It is very important however, and again this message is lost on many of the Western translations of these 
teachings, that all of these limbs in Patañjali's system are meant to hang together and be practiced 
collectively and meant to be constantly reinforced as it were.  The physical aspects of Yoga, which are 
emphasized in most if not all of the Western adaptations of his system, are but a means to the end and not 
an end in and of themselves, and even these aspects of the system rest on very foundational and basic moral 
and ethical precepts - both abstentions and active observances - which underpin the entire practice.  
Yoga can be looked at as a theo-philosophical pyramid of sorts, where the base or foundation of the pyramid 
are the moral and ethical principles upon which the whole system stands, after which physical purification 
can begin to be practiced and honed, upon which the art of meditation as reflected in the system of Yoga 
which Patañjali teaches, can begin to be practiced and mastered.  The final stage, the eight limb which is 
samādhi, represents not just a "goal" or "objective" of the system, as the Western mind likes to look at things 
as a sort of "conquest" of sorts, but a state of consciousness, i.e. supraconsciousness, which although from a 
certain perspective may represent the culmination of the practice as the practitioner comes to a complete 
understanding of the basic reality and theo-philosophical Truth which the system is designed to reveal, but 
also nonetheless reflects, and ultimately stands upon, the foundational practices which are reflected in each 
and every one of the "eight limbs".  
In other words, the notion of realization within Yoga, emphasizes not just the attainment of some sort of goal 
or objective, or even some state of mind or level of consciousness, but is understood as the effective and 
consistent practice of all eight limbs within the entire theo-philosophical system together in conjunction with 
each other in harmony and balance with each other such that a state of being can be arrived at as it were, or 
attained if we want to look at the theo-philosophical system through a Western intellectual lens, upon which 
Yoga is realized.  In this context then, and only through proper understanding of all of the limbs of the system 
and how they work together, this final state of realization is constructed upon all of the eight limbs which 
come together and are fully integrated and synthesized such that the final Truth of the system can be realized 
and/or revealed to the jiva.  Again, the same could also be said of Buddha's Noble Eightfold Path and the 
state of nirvana to which it ascribes as the "end goal" of said system, as understood in Buddhism to be the 
cessation of suffering, i.e. dukkha-nirodha.

What Vivekananda (1863 - 1902) laid out for the West however, was a comprehensive and fully synthesized 
and harmonized view of Indian philosophy which while underscored the importance and relevance of 
Vedānta and Yoga as "true" theo-philosophical systems for the attainment of the end goal of life, i.e. mokṣa 
or liberation, four different aspects of Yoga, or Paths, should be fully understood and practiced by the jiva, or 
Soul, the sum total of which reflect the height and full synthesis, and proper understanding, of Indian 
philosophy in the modern era. 
According to Vivekananda, each of these four pillars of Yoga all reflect different aspects of "Yoga" which are 
to be practiced together and in harmony with each other.  Yoga in this context used by Vivekananda is not to 
be construed in the more classical Indian philosophical context of Yoga as taught by Patañjali, but "Yoga" in 
the more broad sense of term which is perhaps best translated as "Union" or "Path".  These four Paths as he 
describes them and calls them are Raja Yoga, as expounded by Patañjali, Jnana Yoga, or the pursuit of 
knowledge from which the fetters of bondage can be broken intellectually, Karma Yoga, or the practice of 
selfless action which provides the moral and ethical basis for right living for the spiritual aspirant, and Bhakti 
Yoga, which is love of the divine which propels aspirant along the path.  Each of these was the subject of a 
number of talks and works which are attributed to Vivekananda and represent the core of his philosophical 
teachings. 
To Vivekananda, each of these four paths represented not only different approaches to mokṣa, but also 
fundamentally underpinned Vedānta as a theo-philosophical system in and of itself.  While they were treated 
as distinct approaches and philosophical systems from an intellectual perspective, each true in its own right 
and in its own terms and underlying philosophical principles and tenets, but at the same time were recast as 
it were as all different perspectives on the same underlying Truth, a Truth that can be found rooted in the 
Vedas, and each reflecting different paths to the same ultimate goal.  Collectively, the four Yogas as 
Vivekananda teaches them, provide the spiritual aspirant with a more complete and expansive guidebook on 
the entire landscape of spiritual life, in all its nuances and subtleties, from all different perspectives within 
the Indian philosophical tradition, all recast and re-interpreted for the modern era in the West.

 
Figure 40: Swami Vivekananda 

In this context, Raja Yoga is but one of the four paths, to be integrated and understood within the context of 
the existence of the three other paths - Bhakti Yoga, Karma Yoga and Jnana Yoga - each of which brings its 
own expertise, mindset and underlying philosophical and metaphysical perspectives through which Vedānta, 
according to Vivekananda, was to be properly understood and "practiced" as a spiritual discipline.  Vedānta 
from Vivekananda's perspective, was not just as a system of philosophy per se, but should be looked upon 
and studied as a "practical" guide, intellectually and spiritually, to liberation and freedom of the Soul from 
bondage and suffering.  In fact, Vivekananda coined the term Raja, or Royal Yoga, given his perspective on its 
importance within the four pillars of Yoga that were necessary to lead a balanced and liberated life in what 
he saw as an overly materialistic and capitalistic culture whose main focus was the betterment of the 
individual at the expense of the whole.  

The whole universe is one.  There is only one Self in the universe, only One Existence, and that One Existence, 
when it passes through the forms of time, space, and causation, is called by different names, Buddhi, fine 
matter, gross matter, all mental and physical forms.  Everything in the universe is that One, appearing in 
various forms.  When a little part of it comes, as it were, into this network of time, space, and causation, it takes 
forms; take off the network, and it is all one.  Therefore in the Advaita philosophy, the whole universe is all one 
in the Self which is called Brahman.  That Self when it appears behind the universe is called God.  The same Self 
when it appears behind this little universe, the body, is the soul.  This very soul, therefore, is the Self in man.  
There is only one Puruṣa, the Brahman of the Vedānta; God and man, analysed, are one in It.  The universe is 
you yourself, the unbroken you; you are throughout the universe.  "In all hands you work, through all mouths 
you eat, through all nostrils you breathe through all minds you think."  The whole universe is you; the universe is 
your body; you are the universe both formed and unformed.  You are the soul of the universe and its body also.  

You are God, you are the angels, you are man, you are animals, you are the plants, you are the minerals, you 
are everything; the manifestation of everything is you.  Whatever exists is you.  You are the Infinite.  The Infinite 
cannot be divided.  It can have no parts, for each part would be infinite, and then the part would be identical 
with the whole, which is absurd.  Therefore the idea that you are Mr. So-and-so can never be true; it is a day-
dream.  Know this and be free.  This is the Advaita conclusion.  "I am neither the body, nor the organs, nor am I 
the mind; I am Existence, Knowledge, and Bliss absolute; I am He."  This is true knowledge; all reason and 
intellect, and everything else is ignorance.  Where is knowledge for me, for I am knowledge itself!  Where is life 
for me, for I am life itself!  I am sure I live, for I am life, the One Being, and nothing exists except through me, 
and in me, and as me.  I am manifested through the elements, but I am the free One.  

Who seeks freedom?  Nobody. If you think that you are bound, you remain bound; you make your own 
bondage.  If you know that you are free, you are free this moment.  This is knowledge, knowledge of freedom.  
Freedom is the goal of all nature. 

From this passage, an excerpt from one of his lectures on Vedānta and Sāṃkhya philosophy, he crystalizes 
and synthesizes really all of the "orthodox" (again that which rests on the Vedas as the hallmark of Truth), 
one can see not only the very essence of Advaita Vedānta alluded to, but at the same time the importance 
and recognition of the reality of God (Brahman/Īśvara/Viṣṇu) and the Soul (Ātman/jiva) as well as also true 
from a certain perspective.  The sum total of all the systems, all the theo-philosophical beliefs that underpin 
all of the different Indian philosophical systems, all of which he integrates into a modern conception of 
Vedānta that can be understood through the four different paths or approaches - Work (Karma Yoga), 
Devotion (Bhakti Yoga), Knowledge (Jnana Yoga) and Energy (Raja Yoga) - each of which if properly 
understood and performed with the proper intention all lead to the same final destination and all ultimately 
reveal the same eternal and ever-lasting simple truth.  That bondage is of the mind and freedom is of the 
mind as well, and that are fundamental nature is one of freedom and limitlessness and pure consciousness 
itself (Puruṣa or Brahman).
Vivekananda from this perspective can be viewed not only as the central figure responsible for bringing Yoga 
to the West, as he most certainly was, but also as a modern and English interpreter and synthesizer of the 
entire Indian philosophical landscape, a landscape which he ultimately synthesizes under a more expansive 
and inclusive system which is referred to as Vedānta in that again it does not reject but ultimately accepts the 
knowledge of the Vedas.  While Ramakrishna's life and teachings can be viewed as the illustration of the 
truth and power of all systems of religion, all merely representing different paths to the same goal (Truth is 
one, sages call it various names as the Upanishadic verse goes), to Vivekananda, life and the universe was a 
gymnasium for the Soul, and his (re)formulation of Vedānta for the West in the modern era can be seen as 
his classically "Indian" guidebook for the modern spiritual aspirant put in succinct and clear Western 
terminology and using a modern Western language, i.e. English.

All great religions speak of mankind's special place in the universe of creation.  In the Eastern tradition 
specifically, as taught by Ramakrishna and in Tibetan Buddhism for example, the uniqueness of the human 
life (the jiva, or Soul as it is referred to in the Indian philosophical tradition), as an instrument of the direct 
perception of the divine and the vehicle of liberation is emphasized.  
In the Buddhist tradition, there is a wonderful story, a parable, which illustrates this.  There is a turtle in a 
great, vast ocean.  And in this vast ocean there is a small ring that floats on its surface somewhere, a ring with 
a circumference no bigger than a few feet across.  This ring bobs and floats in this vast sea carried by currents 
and storms and waves.  In this same ocean, there lives a sea turtle.  A turtle which like all turtles must pop his 
nose above the surface every few minutes in order to breathe and stay alive, even though he lives most of his 
life under the sea.  It is said that to be born in a human, and have the opportunity for liberation and 
illumination which is unique to our species, is said to be as lucky as fortunate and as improbable as that very 
same sea turtle, swimming in the vastness of the great ocean of the universe, popping its head up for air and 
happening to stick his nose through that small ring bobbing and floating on the surface.  As Ramakrishna so 
succinctly puts it, "He is born in vain, who having attained the human birth, so difficult to get, does not 
attempt to realize God in this very life."
What is it that is so special about the human form?  The Yoga tradition specifically calls out this form as a tool 
for illumination and realization, in a manner that is quite direct.  Raja Yoga describes how to perfect and hone 
this human form to prepare it for illumination, how to harness its energy, outlining a psycho-physiological 
system to perfect and strengthen the body through the use of various positions and stretches called āsanas, 
designed to leverage and awaken the life force within the body, prāṇa, and direct it upward through the 
spiritual channels that flow through the human form which are said to be concentrated in very specific 
centers, chakras, that run alongside and parallel to the spine, a spiritual channel referred to as the sushumna 
or nadi. 
This energy is also referred to as the serpent of kuṇḍalinī which is implied in the Hindu/Yoga tradition and is 
explicitly called out in Tantric Yoga as Śakti, the divine force which is associated with the goddess Kālī that 
underlies all creation.  This Śakti, or kuṇḍalinī, typically lies latent at the base of the spine of the individual 
centered around the lower three chakras which are associated with the basic, core needs of the human form 
- eating, sleeping and sexual desire.   Ultimately the theo-philosophical system of Raja Yoga, which is a 
more modern interpretation of Yoga as outlined in the Yoga Sūtras of Patañjali, which is inherently mystical 
like all of the Indian theo-philosophical traditions for the most part, is designed to facilitate and support the 
ultimate liberation, mokṣa, or mukti, of the Soul, or jiva.  
The doctrine of Yoga as outlined by Patañjali, although it doesn't speak of kuṇḍalinī directly, is effectively the 
art of honing and facilitating the upward movement of this energy, up through the system of chakras in the 
human form as outlined in Tantric systems of Yoga, for the purpose of liberation, or in Patañjali's 
nomenclature for the purpose of experiencing samādhi.  Patañjali's system starts with principles that govern 
what to avoid (yama) and what to observe or cultivate (niyama), providing for a foundation of ethics, 
morality and even the basic notion of worship itself as core principles for anyone wishing to practice Yoga 
with the intent of liberating oneself from the world of name and form, the endless suffering that is called out 
so specifically in the Buddhist tradition, which shares a common philosophical parent with Yoga i.e. the 
Vedas.
This practice of Yoga is essentially the conscious practice of awakening the energy or life force within each 
and every one of us, a notion which is very much aligned with the Christian notion of the Holy Spirit.  Tantric 
Yoga specifically is designed to lift this kuṇḍalinī, latent serpent power, to the higher chakras located at the 
region of the heart, the throat, the forehead and ultimately through the chakra located at the top of the 
head, the thousand petalled lotus, which once opened yields the state of samādhi.   
Once these chakras are opened, through the practice of Yoga and other Tantric rituals that leverage 
mandalas (visual symbols) and mantras (incantations and sound), the jiva experiences unrefined and 
unfiltered consciousness, higher and more subtle realms of reality where the distinction between the 
observer and the observed gives way to the direct perception of consciousness itself - referred to as samādhi 
in the Yoga tradition and as Satcitānanda, or Existence-Knowledge-Bliss-Absolute, in the Upanishads.  
In the Yoga tradition, one which has been adopted by the West in the last hundred years or so as an 
alternative in many respects to the Abrahamic religions that have dominated Western thought for almost 
two thousand years, the human form is perceived as a bundle of energy, energy that is directly related to the 
cosmic energy from which it draws its source.  Is that not the true meaning behind the notion of mankind 
being created in God's image which is a core tenet of Christianity, Islam and certainly Judaism from which this 
notion ultimately derives, i.e. in Genesis?  The Yoga tradition describes this in more concrete terms though, 
explaining why we as a species are so special, along with a fairly structured path toward the ultimate 
realization, the quintessential understanding, of this connection between the creator and the created.  
This connection between the individual Soul and the universal Soul is essentially what all of the ancient 
cosmological systems were about, these same mythological stories of the creation of the universe and 
mankind's place in it which are looked upon today as mere stories of the ignorant trying to explain that which 
these ancient peoples did not understand, notions that we now have a "better" grasp on in the age of 
science, were actually deep and profound mystical truths whose power had been lost throughout the ages as 
the metaphors had been watered down into stories that found their way into the literature of various 
religious systems - the Vedas of the Hindus, the Theogony of Hesiod, the traditions which yielded the 
cosmologies of the Ancient Egyptians which are found in the Book of Res-Menu, the cosmogony inherent in 
the clearly sacred text of the Derveni Papyrus, and of course in Genesis of the Old Testament which sits 
behind Christianity, Islam and Judaism to which some 4 billion people ascribe to today in some form or 
another.
In essence, the heart of the Indo-Aryan theo-philosophical tradition, which includes Buddhism, lies in this 
pursuit of the understanding of the nature of mind through various practices, methods and systems of 
metaphysics - what we call the Science of the mind.  And it is through these practices, and through an 
understanding of the nature of mind, or the Soul, and its relationship to the Absolute, or God, that represents 
the core of all systems of Yoga despite their focus on the body and health today.   The Western religious 
traditions had abandoned this notion of direct perception and realization of the divine, even though Jesus 
called it out specifically.  Why?  Because they were designed to unite an empire, unite a people, and in so 
doing could only ascribe to one path of worship and were forced to formulate, and legislate, their teachings 
such that the power of the divine was closely guarded by the select few.  
But the Eastern traditions went down a different path, where not only was it believed the individual soul 
could be liberated from the world of ceaseless suffering, but that this liberation was the very purpose to 
existence, the ultimate goal of the soul as it were, the eudaimonia of Aristotle (typically translated as 
"happiness") which is the ultimate purpose (telos) of the human being and thereby defines its existence to a 
great extent, much more so than the material causes which bring about the existence of the human form 
which we are so focused on in biology and western medicine today.
The Eastern theo-philosophical traditions of Yoga and Buddhism not only lay out a system of ethics and 
morality within which life should be lived, but also lay out a purpose to life which is based upon the goal of, 
and fundamental belief in, liberation as the ultimate goal of life.  This is the ultimate freedom from suffering 
in the Buddhist tradition, i.e. nirvana, and the attainment of mokṣa of Patañjali's Yoga.  They all cajole us to 
go back to the source, to recognize our connection with supreme consciousness, or supraconsciousness.  Not 
through any specific prophet or message, not espousing one set of beliefs, one God over any other, but the 
practice of Yoga, meditation and living in harmony with our surroundings as well as the people and society 
within which we live, in order that this illumination, this liberation, this "happiness" can be experienced.  
And in this philosophy, the human form is said to be higher than even the forms of the Gods and Angels, for 
although in the world of the Gods there lie unlimited desires and powers, the prospect and chance of 
liberation does not exist.  This view of the mortal life being so special and unique can be found implicit in 
Greek mythology as well, where the realm of the gods and the realm of men mixed and coalesced for 
centuries prior to the advent of the historical record, giving rise to its mythology and the Age of Heroes for 
which arguably the Greeks are perhaps best known.
So it is up to the jiva then, the individual soul, to determine what to do with this great energy that it has 
access to, this great opportunity for liberation.  Vivekananda tells us that all beings, whether cognizant of the 
fact or not, are moving toward the same goal, either consciously or subconsciously.  That the natural flow and 
path of everything in existence is to get back to its source, whether this is directly perceived or not.  A 
reflection at the microcosmic level of the omnipresent inbreathing and outbreathing of Brahman, the process 
of evolution and devolution of all energy and matter from and back to its source, of which the human being 
represents its most latently powerful and beautiful form.