
In many respects, one can consider the age that we live in, the Quantum Era, as one of intense intellectual 
crisis and turmoil, very much analogous to the crisis that the intellectuals faced during the Enlightenment Era 
after the world had almost literally been turned upside down.  We see clear indications of this crisis, 
manifestations as it were, on the world stage with 

i.	global warming: a threat on a scale that we as a global community have ever faced before and has the 
potential for devastating consequences, some of which are already starting to see.  Changing climate 
leading to shortages of and lack of food and water, large scale people unrest and movement leading to 
further political instability.
ii.	nuclear proliferation: an increasing number of nation states have access to, and are actively working on, 
nuclear weaponry, 
iii.	rise of radical extremism: aka Terrorism, which primarily is looked at through an Islamic lens but runs 
deeper than that and is not necessarily a fundamentally religious problem much less an Islamic one,
iv.	the rise of nationalism: aka populism that is sweeping through Western democracies like a cancer almost, 
Brexit and the rise of Trumpism in the United States as perhaps the most glaring examples, and
v.	increasing wealth inequality: leading to general unrest and broad class inequality even within wealthy 
nations, also starting to take root between nations as well, 

All of these socio-political trends, and particularly those that are leading to socio-political instability and 
change, grouped with the threat of Terrorism and nuclear proliferation, together significantly increase the 
probability of not just instability, but conflict and destruction at a scale that we have not encountered in the 
history of mankind.  Furthermore, many of these threats, or trends, are a direct result of, or at least are 
partially caused by, ideological differences and/or deficiencies.  This is the case in particular with respect to 
the rise of nationalism, increasing income inequality, as well as Terrorism, both underlying socio-political 
trends that, when paired with Global Warming and the resulting shift in access to resources, put mankind in a 
precarious position indeed.  
If we take them all together then, given their global scope and reach, and given the ideological basis for at 
least a core group of them, it is not too much of a stretch to argue that at least some degree (and we would 
argue to a large degree), these trends are a function of, a direct result of, the proliferation of Western 
ideology throughout the world which rests on not so much democracy and freedom (although this is what 
many of our leaders in the West would have us believe), but more so on capitalism and materialism, precisely 
the hot buttons for the radical extremists, which in turn drive radical (religious) extremism to a large extent.  
Therefore, it is a logical and rational deduction to conclude that these trends, these problems and challenges 
that characterize the modern era within which we live, while manifesting of course on the material or 
physical plane, if not addressed ideologically, are fundamentally unsolvable - each of them potentially having 
devastating effects to the global community and all of them together representing arguably the greatest 
threat mankind has ever faced, certainly modern man.  
From a pure intellectual perspective, from a metaphysical perspective, we see analogs for these ideological 
challenges in the domain of Physics, crystalizing in the search for a so-called Unified Field Theory, a quest first 
outlined by Einstein after the advancements of Quantum Theory - a theoretical framework which although 
extraordinarily powerful leading to all sorts of amazing and revolutionary scientific advancements, 
nonetheless forces us to look very hard and close at the principles of causal determinism and objective 
realism not just as underlying theories for Physics, but also as theoretical assumptions regarding the nature 
of the world we live in, as an ontological paradigm no less.  
Since the introduction and acceptance of Quantum Theory, we have been exposed to a variety of intellectual 
paradigms intended to explain how these seemingly contradictory worlds, Classical Mechanics and Quantum 
Theory, can both be true at the same time - the many worlds interpretation for example, or Bohmian 
Mechanics which has given us this notion of holomovement and implicate order.  Furthermore, these 
developments in Physics have interestingly led to many proponents of Eastern philosophy to look at some of 
the underlying foundational precepts of Quantum Theory - locality being perhaps the most prominent of 
these - as consistent with their ontology, the world as an expression of divine consciousness where the 
system as a whole informs local events as it were.
We also have at the same time, due in no small measure to globalization and technological advancements 
ever since the beginning of the 20th century really, seen the spread of Eastern philosophical traditions, mostly 
in the form of Yoga, throughout the world, beyond the classically "Eastern" borders, having now become 
almost ubiquitous in the West.  While the driver of this spread is arguably mostly materialistic, i.e. an 
obsession with the body and health, the search for the extension of life and well-being, the philosophical as 
well as theological implications of this diffusion of worldviews is significant.  
For one, the Eastern worldview is not foreign to most people in the West now as it was say at the beginning 
of the Quantum Era before WWII, and second the idea of an underlying, active consciousness from which 
both the mind and the physical world manifest, and in turn rest or depend upon for existence, is not a 
completely foreign or outrageous concept to those who have been exposed to these Eastern philosophical 
traditions, despite the fact that this notion has for the most part been rejected by the Scientific community.
Also, while the rational foundations of Religion, theology, has been under attack since the Scientific 
Revolution more or less, now with the proliferation of Yoga and Buddhism and other forms of Eastern 
philosophy, which integrate theology and metaphysics, along with very specific spiritual practices like 
meditation, in order to facilitate and demonstrate the underlying ontological truth of said theological belief 
systems, Religion - at least in the West - is becoming not only an endangered species but is looked upon 
almost as barbaric in a way, as we see for example in how Islam is viewed in particular which has become 
very closely associated with radical extremism, i.e. Terrorism.  
These trends have not only metaphysical and theological implications, but also moral and ethical ones as 
well.  A further attack on the religious establishment while (superficially) many may not have a problem with, 
and many in the atheist community especially directly espouse, leads us to the very precarious position again 
as to the basis of, and fundamental attributes of, morality and ethics.
The problem effectively runs across a variety of intellectual lines but, like alcoholism or drug addiction or any 
problem for that matter, the first step to solving said problem is recognizing that there is in fact a problem.  
It's not clear that we as a global community have reached that conclusion yet - not just for each of the 
individual problems we have laid out, but even the level of crisis that we are at given the scope of all of the 
problems put together.  
Having said that, certainly a step in the right direction is to try and establish the proper and appropriate 
intellectual framework out of which the solutions to these problems - each of them individually and then the 
group of them collectively - at least have the potential of being solved.  Because while these problems are on 
a scale that we have yet to encounter in the history of mankind, they still nonetheless require action at the 
individual level in order for us to at least have a fighting chance to solve them.  Politics is local as they say.  
Furthermore, given the scale of some of these issues and their inherent complexity, socio-political structures 
need to be established that again have the appropriate intellectual paradigm or worldview such that the 
problems can be attacked and addressed at the nation-state and global level - a two-pronged approach as it 
were.
From the author's point of view at least, in order to establish the proper and appropriate intellectual 
framework we must truly recognize - from an epistemological perspective - that the underlying ground of 
existence, what we have called supraconsciousness, is not just some ethereal thing that a few crazy mystics 
or sages have experienced and some folks have written a book about.  That this whole "the kingdom of God 
is within" message from the son of a carpenter some two thousand years ago, and the countless other 
messages from saints and prophets throughout the ages, is not just a bunch of hog wash.  Anything less than 
this, anything that is purely empirically or rationally based that does not have any theological implications, 
simply does not go far enough, or deep enough, to address some, or perhaps all, of these issues.  
God - if he does indeed exist - needs to be placed on former, more realistic, footing such that morality and 
the social good in and of itself is not a "liberal" or philosophical idea, but is the most practical of rational 
deductions that is based upon the fundamental understanding of the interconnectedness of all living beings - 
again not on just an intellectual or ethereal level, but on a practical and very grounded level as reflected in 
the "mystical" experience as it is understood by the Eastern philosophical traditions.  And if he does not exist, 
well then off he goes into the intellectual and metaphysical trashbin, forcing us to construct an intellectual 
paradigm based on need within the context of the crises of our time rather than due to any theological 
certainty.  Either path represents a necessary condition for us to make it successfully through the crisis of our 
time and move beyond it, given the scale and complexity of these challenges and threats that are confronting 
us.  
To get there, in terms of providing and informing the rest of the disciplines that will need to be brought to 
bear on these problems, we must start with Philosophy - determining to what extent if at all can these 
mystical frameworks that are buried into the collective mythos of man can be laid out in a pure rational 
model, as required by Philosophy as a discipline in and of itself in modern academia.  As opposed to starting 
with the assumption that there exists a divine being, i.e. God, from which the universe - and us - have been 
created which is no doubt fraught with problems.  
But the problem is more difficult than it appears, the decks are stacked against us as it were, because even 
the very description of the problem is tainted with the problem.  We live in a fundamentally dualistic world 
where that which is perceived and the perceiver are forever separated by a veneer of objectivity.  The 
subject-object-metaphysical presumption of reality, as expressed in the full range of epistemological solutions 
that have been provided over the millennia, is baked into the very semantics of our language making it 
almost impossible to break free from.  
This is why Pirsig felt the need to come up with an almost indefinable word, a word indefinable by nature, 
that sits above the whole intellectual paradigm, in order to try and capture it in some way, i.e. Quality.  This 
was the same solution that the ancient mystics of the East came up with as well of course, using words like 
the Dao, or Brahman, to reflect that which was undefinable, and to a large extent even unknowable, but yet 
at the same time played a profound role in the creation and preservation of the universe and all life within it.
As an example, if look at ontology as a Philosophical discipline, one of the dominant undercurrent themes of 
this work of course, and one of the more active and thriving fields within Philosophy today - we find implicit 
within the word, the discipline, itself, this same objective paradigm of existence that we are trying to move 
away from. - ontology is the science of, or study of, being or reality - but by whom?   If there is a verb, there 
must be an actor against it, and presumably - although less restrictively - an object as well.  This is in fact an 
Indo-European linguistic construct - subject verb object - providing a tremendously powerful intellectual tool 
through which we can not only explore our reality, our world - describe it, articulate it, improve upon it, etc. - 
but also persist information and knowledge itself so that the sum total of knowledge is carried forward from 
one generation to the next with a high degree of specificity.  
Almost relentlessly though, subject-object-metaphysics is embedded into not just our intellectual framework, 
but even our linguistic framework as well, leaving us with a classical chick and egg problem as it were.  Once 
that linguistic invention is applied, we are left with the foregone conclusion that our worldview must be 
reductionist - it has to be, because that is the only way we can express anything, in any Indo-European 
language really, the language family that that has provided the linguistic, and effectively the intellectual, 
foundations of the West.  Every time you try and solve it you go further down the rabbit hole as it were.
This is why in order to solve the problem, bridge this intellectual divide as it were, one is almost forced to 
revert back to the initial theo-philosophical solutions that were presented by the very first philosophers in 
the West, by Plato, Aristotle, and others that were the forefathers of Western philosophy, as well as in the 
Eastern traditions as well such as in the Upanishads in the Indian tradition, which although are still hamstrung 
with this subject-object-metaphysical worldview that is baked into their language, nonetheless made 
provisions for this fundamental unified, holistic, monistic, mystical, supra-intellectual, supraconscious 
construct, to be described somehow.  This was the Being of the early Hellenic philosophical tradition (Plato 
primarily), the One of the Neo-Platonists, and the Satcitānanda (or somewhat anthropomorphized Brahman) 
of the Upanishads. 
So linguistically then, we are almost forced to go back to the very foundations of theology, metaphysics 
really, in order to connect this very ancient notion of God as an integral aspect of his creation - God is 
everything, God is in everything and as such is the ground of all experience and in turn is the (intellectual as 
well as physical and spiritual) ground of experience in and of itself - this is essentially what we find in 
Upanishadic philosophy as Satcitānanda and in the West is reflected perhaps most eloquently in the Neo-
Platonic One.  
In these initial intellectual systems, the philosophia of the West, although the semantic structure was laid 
down as a function of the Indo-European subject and object based linguistic constructs, effectively the 
foundations Western thought, of Science, these ancient systems nonetheless did not carry the same sort of 
reductionist emphasis that we are confronted with today, as they are seen reflected in the mirror of Science 
as it were, after Philosophy as a discipline split between natural and theoretical lines. 
This takes us to the ancient Hellenes once again, with Plato primarily as the perhaps the first metaphysician 
and theologian, although certainly not the first philosopher.  Despite his rational bent, he still nonetheless 
captured in a way that ancient mystical quality that is characteristic of the Paleolithic religions throughout 
Eurasia which preceded him - what we refer to quite broadly as shamanism.  This mystic quality is again best 
captured in the Platonic philosophy of Plotinus, the quintessential Neo-Platonist - his doctrine of the One 
which manifests itself, via emanation of sorts, into the many by way of the Divine Intellect, or Nous.  Neo-
Platonism from a mystical and theological standpoint in fact is eerily similar to its Indo-European brother on 
the Indian subcontinent, the philosophy we find implicit to the Upanishads which forms the basis of Vedānta.  
Here we find the notion of the single, divine principle as well, referred to as Brahman, a metaphysical 
abstraction of Brahmā, the creator of the universe in the Vedic mythos - minus the numerological significance 
inherent to the Neo-Platonic One of course, one of the distinctive features of Hellenic philosophy.  Then, 
through the cosmic ordering principle of Ṛta, which comes to be understood in the later Indian philosophical 
tradition - and Buddhism - as dharma, the cosmos is brought into existence, corresponding quite elegantly to 
the Neo-Platonic Nous, a sort of Divine Intellect that is rational, i.e. reflects a sense of order, but at the same 
time is intelligent in the sense that it reflects a being of some kind, something that is "alive".  
Furthermore, in both Neo-Platonism as well as with Upanishadic philosophy (as well as with Christianity as 
well in fact) we find this all-pervading cosmic principle reflected in the individual in the notion of the Soul, the 
last of the great triad of metaphysical and theological constructs in Plotinus's interpretation of Plato which 
corresponds again quite neatly to the Upanishadic Ātman, the individual manifestation of Brahman through 
which his (or her) creation is experienced.  Implicit in this characteristically Indo-European theo-philosophy is 
that man is created, or exists, in the image of God - one of the fundamental Indo-European theological tenets 
in fact and one which we can see implicit in the Upanishads, but also embedded in virtually all of Hellenic 
philosophy as well which in turn forms the basis of Judeo-Christian theology.
In the Chinese tradition, they are somewhat less hamstrung, and came up with the notion of Dao, which is 
more process (change really) based than it is based upon any sort of subject, or object, or experience.  It's a 
way, a path, an experiential process of "living", of "being".  The metaphysics of the Yìjīng supports this as the 
Dao, as a theo-philosophical principle or tenet, runs almost orthogonal to the Yìjīng when looked at through a 
metaphysical or philosophical lens.  From this perspective, the Yìjīng not only describes Fate itself, but also 
provides a framework for coaxing out of it potential future outcomes given a) a totality of possible states of 
"being", and b) knowledge of the relationship of these states to one another, and c) an identification of the 
current state of "being" that best describes the current "situation" as it relates to the total possible set of 
states of possible existence.  
This is the power of the Chinese theo-philosophical framework, it doesn't try and solve an epistemological 
"problem", or even a metaphysical one, but it does present (at least one possible) ontological solution, as 
well as - quite ingeniously - a means by which one can have dialogue with It.  "It" in this case being the 
primordial ontological system itself within which you as an experiential, process and change based entity that 
sits within the Earth-Heaven-Man paradigm of universal order exist.
This is why the Eastern philosophical systems in particular have become so appealing, because - in their 
inherent language which reflects their worldview - the reductionist ontology is (almost) entirely effaced - it 
has no room to exist.  The entire vocabulary of the systems in question require you to abandon it.  And it is 
with the language, the vocabulary itself, that the solution really shows itself, manifests as it were.  It is 
therefore along these lines we must look, to the very first philosophical systems that were created in 
antiquity, to the very origins of philosophy in ancient times, because it is at the very beginning of the 
establishment of the philosophical tradition that we have our best chance, in terms of vocabulary and model, 
to re-integrate that which was lost when we went down the reductionist and materialist path through and via 
Science.  
But these ancient philosophical systems, which are just as much theological as they are philosophical of 
course, despite their power in integrating the so-called mystical directly into the philosophical framework as 
it were, nonetheless are lacking in terms of - given the time period within which they emerged and were 
developed - integrating the last millennia or so of intellectual developments, as reflected specifically for 
example in the domain of Science, i.e. Physics as it has evolved through the Copernican revolution, 
Newtonian Mechanics and then most recently with Quantum Mechanics.  
They also of course do not address the philosophical advancements that have run in parallel to these 
advancements on the empirical side as reflected most poignantly by Kant, whose work effectively integrates 
the empiricist (materialist) and rationalist (idealists) philosophical schools that had evolved and countered 
each other since the very dawn of philosophy, civilization really, in the West.
Kant gets us a little closer from a metaphysical standpoint, directly integrating experience into philosophy as 
the very ground of epistemology.  But God in Kant's philosophy is an intellectual construct, a necessary 
condition of his Metaphysics of Morals, but nonetheless not the ontological penultimate principle in any way.  
To Kant, it is Reason that is the benchmark of truth, Reason as an abstract construct that exists within, and is 
ultimately bound and defined by, mankind's ability to perceive or understand, i.e. cognate.  Kant's 
epistemology is fundamentally Psychological, and therefore his metaphysics is Psychological just as much as it 
is rational. 

 
Figure 41: Neo-Metaphysics: A Modern, Synthetic Theo-Philosophical Perspective

At first the work was an attempt to define a new metaphysics, but in order to do this successfully, a new 
epistemological framework is required - a new model with new semantics that integrates the notion of the 
direct experience of God as, if possible, a firm element of truth from which in fact all truth, all knowledge, 
stems from.  
While Pirsig's Metaphysics of Quality hints at a new ontology, his new paradigm based upon the metaphysical 
notion of Quality doesn't truly integrate the mystical experience in a meaningful way.  While it's present, it's 
almost an afterthought given the focus of his work on the metaphysics of value really, from which a broader 
and more encompassing system of morality can effectively be inferred.  But while it's an extraordinarily 
powerful model no doubt, arguably revolutionizing metaphysics and Philosophy, it's an altogether Western 
paradigm from a theological standpoint, even if it is not reductionist, or at least partially reductionist, in its 
hierarchical structure. 
Looking at the problem from a further level of abstraction as it were, it would seem that a requisite step 
along the path toward a resolution, or at least an amelioration, of some of these issues that are reflective of 
the proliferation of this characteristically Western ideology taken to the extreme (not sufficient but 
necessary) would be to try and establish a more firm metaphysical structure, a new ontological paradigm, 
within which this characteristically Eastern philosophical notion of mysticism could be integrated with 
Western philosophy, with Reason really.  
In other words, it would seem that what we have is a philosophical problem, in the sense that there must be 
something fundamentally missing from our basic core intellectual paradigm through which not only individual 
decisions are being made, but also on a grander scale at the sociological as well as political level, such that we 
are ending up with problems on the scale that we have today, continually reinforcing the challenges and 
problems that effectively define the current era of crisis that we are in - the so-called Quantum Era.
Furthermore, at a more detailed level staying within the domain of Philosophy, it's an ontological problem in 
the sense that it is some higher order of reality that is required in order to explain the full range of 
phenomenon - phenomenon in this sense as not just physical phenomenon (objective reality), not just 
psychological phenomenon (subjective reality), and not just experiential reality, but a reality within which 
experience itself can take place as a phenomenon in itself.  It's an epistemological problem in the sense that 
our current notions of knowledge - how a thing can be known as well as the inverse which is effectively how 
we define "the world", or at least "the world that can be known" - are again wholly inadequate for the job at 
hand.  
To put it succinctly, what we need here is an epistemological paradigm that contains within it the full range of 
phenomenon, the expansion of the notion of phenomenon in fact, to include not just the physical (the 
objective reality of the materialists and the empiricists like Aristotle, Epicurus, Bacon and Locke among 
others), and not just the rational (the idealistic and rationalistic reality Plato, Descartes and Leibniz for 
example), and not just the psychological or experiential which subsumes both (like Kant for example - or even 
Freud or Jung), but a reality that describes all of the above within a paradigm that is 
a)	philosophical in the sense that it is fully rational, 
b)	metaphysical in the sense that it is supra-physical and supra-rational and covers the range of 
phenomena which includes things and ideas, 
c)	theological in the sense that first principles, arche, are fully integrated (rather than left outside of it 
as defining attributes or characteristics like categories for example in the philosophy of Aristotle and 
Kant) 

If this is possible, if we can maintain consistency, rationality and coherence and still achieve these three 
goals, we can achieve much in terms of establishing an ontological and metaphysical paradigm that rests on 
much broader and firm ground, and increasing its applicability beyond just the domain of Philosophy such 
that it can provide an intellectual foundation for mankind to tackle some of these great challenges it is faced 
with.

Thankfully we do not have to recreate the wheel to in order to try and formulate a more global and holistic 
intellectual paradigm through which we at least have a chance to address some of these persistent and global 
problems that are so characteristics of our time, i.e. the so-called "Quantum Era".  
Most of the groundwork has been put in place already by Kant, although his framework stops just short of 
what we need.  Kant's philosophy is revolutionary in the sense that he is able to integrate the reality of the 
rationalists and empiricists in one metaphysical system, and he does this by inverting the classical ontological 
paradigm, declaring that knowledge is only how we may perceive it through our cognitive faculties and that 
no other definition of it - either empirically or rationally - stands to Reason, quite literally.  In his own words 
(translated from the German of course)

If we take away the subject (Humans), or even only the subjective constitution of our senses in general, then not 
only the nature and relations of objects in space and time, but even space and time themselves disappear; and 
that these, as appearances, cannot exist in themselves, but only in us. What may be the nature of objects 
considered as things in themselves and without reference to the receptivity of our sensibility is quite unknown 
to us. ... not only are the raindrops mere appearances, but even their circular form, nay, the space itself through 
which they fall, is nothing in itself, but both are mere modifications or fundamental dispositions of our sensible 
intuition, whilst the transcendental object remains for us utterly unknown. 

This is his Copernican revolution of philosophy, that objective phenomenon and their relations, and even 
space and time in and of themselves, are fundamentally psychological phenomenon.  To this extent, Kant and 
Pirsig follow similar lines, going back to the beginning as it were, where Reason is considered to be the 
primordial and most fundamental principle under which all domains of knowledge should be conceived and 
as such establish their respective systems of metaphysics on the basis of this principle alone - i.e. Reason.  
Reason in this sense is not only considered to be the distinguishing characteristic of man (homo sapiens after 
all) - that which separates it from the rest of the species on the planet - but one which, according to virtually 
every theo-philosophical tradition that has been created since civilized man has existed or been known to 
exist, is the very connecting or linking principle which is the common thread between man and the divine.  
It is Reason that is the means by which man is created in God's image as is expressed so eloquently in the 
Judeo-Christian tradition, i.e. the Logos, and it is of course implied in the Eastern theo-philosophical 
traditions in toto as it is this belief in the fundamental unity of man as a spiritual being, as a rational being, 
that gives it the unique disposition and capability to experience the divine directly.  It is the cosmic Reason 
that in turn orders the universe, the Neo-Platonic Nous through which the universe is born and is 
sustained.   
But Kant's work, more specifically his Critique as it is called, is considered to represent the very height of 
Enlightenment Era philosophy and as such let's begin there, taking his philosophy, his metaphysics more 
specifically, as a given rather than starting from scratch (and/or immediately irritating all of our Kantian 
philosophers out there and I would expect there are many).  But before we begin let us say that our goal here 
is explicitly NOT the full exposition, comprehension or elucidation of Kant's philosophy - there are endless 
courses, teachers and other forums for such exercises.  
What we intend to do, what we are doing, is leveraging his work so that we need not re-invent the wheel so 
to speak from a metaphysical point of view. Let's take his position, his transcendental idealism as it has come 
to be known, as valid and true, and perhaps more importantly rationally coherent and complete and identify 
what about said systemn, given what we know now, is incomplete or lacking. 
This is effectively how mankind has developed knowledge throughout his history, not by going over tracks 
and modes or ways of thought over again that have been walked by our ancestors, but presuming the 
coherence, and fundamental utility, of said work and in turn - where appropriate and/or necessary - building 
upon such work.  Philosophy somehow seems bent on re-inventing everything every generation however, 
and as such deters from its ability to persist, and impress, upon the minds of each ensuing generation. Like 
for example the network stack upon which the Internet is built.  Those that develop Internet applications do 
not have to understand how it is that machines on the Internet exchange traffic, information essentially, 
these programs simply inherit, leverage really, libraries and APIs (application programming interfaces) that 
encapsulate such knowledge.  
This is effectively what we are doing here, building upon Kant's work so that we need not re-invent it, but at 
the same time expanding upon it because there are things we know today, that are relevant and important 
today with respect to metaphysics and ontology specifically, that were not of relevance when Kant lived, 
studied and wrote.  This is how human knowledge moves forward, in particular as it relates to highly complex 
topics, problems, like what we are confronted with here.  
Taking Kant's metaphysics as our starting point then, his ontological first principle is of course the human 
mind, an entity that Kant effectively equates with a cognitive engine of sorts through which all knowledge of 
any sort is or can be gained - a priori knowledge being a specific type of knowledge that is unique to this 
cognitive entity, like time and space, which represent not basic objective or rational phenomena that exist in 
and of themselves, but phenomena that exist as a function of the mind and its cognitive capabilities. To Kant 
then, and this is fundamental to his epistemological position, knowledge is bound by (human) experience. 
According to Kant's Critique, the human mind basically has three basic functions for arriving at knowledge of 
anything, as much as knowledge can be arrived at. While we use Kant's "epistemic" framework, we adopt a 
more modern psychological description herein for each of the three faculties that Kant presented as 
properties of mind that (hopefully) are easier to understand (no pun intended), slightly adapting the 
terminology that Kant uses which is translated from the German over 200 years ago.  
In his mental cognitive framework, there are basically three distinct faculties which in aggregate make up the 
total function of mind as a cognitive, epistemic entity which can arrive at the knowledge of anything:
i.	perception (Kant's sensibility): that aspect of mind that directly interfaces with and/or perceives 
the sensible realm, i.e. the physical world, 
ii.	comprehension (Kant's understanding and imagination): that aspect of mind which works with 
the faculty of perception to make sense of that which is being experienced.  While it is a rational 
faculty, it does not operate on the same level of rational abstraction as understanding, 
iii.	understanding (Kant's judgment or reason): that faculty of mind that is capable of fully 
intellectually absorbing the meaning of an experience, applying various higher level intellectual 
paradigms - sociological, philological, biological, etc. - to an experience through which a deeper 
level of meaning, or purpose, relative to comprehension certainly, can be acquired.

According to Kant then, it is through these cognitive faculties - either individually or collectively - that man is 
able to make sense of anything, by which sensory input is integrated with mind given its various cognitive 
faculties.  It is from this basic framework from which not only does Kant construct his practical philosophy, his 
Metaphysics of Morals, but also from which he establishes the requisite existence of God, and its close 
corollary the immortality of the Soul, as deduced preconditions of mankind as a function of him (or her) being 
a rational being as it were, as byproducts of mind effectively.  
Kant's Critique certainly solves many, if not all, of the questions and issues that were of concern during the 
Enlightenment Era with respect to (what Kant considered) the radical forms of both empiricism and 
rationalism that were prevalent (and yielded metaphysical conundrums such as that nothing could be known 
for example), as well as the very shaky ground that theology in general was on, begging some serious 
questions regarding the justification for morality or ethics at all. 
What Kant leaves out however, and this is not surprising given the problem(s) he is looking to solve (a 
different era no doubt, where the relevance of Eastern philosophy, and more generally mysticism, were not 
questions that were of concern in Philosophy at that time) is from what metaphysical or ontological ground is 
this experience occurring, or are these cognitive faculties working? Put another way, from what principle are 
the cognitive faculties, man and mind essentially, derived from? 
A Kantian would no doubt argue that this question is of no consequence epistemologically as all knowing, all 
knowledge itself, is a process of apprehension based upon sensory experience combined with perception 
(aesthetics) and comprehension and understanding as pure cognitive facilties (logic) - at least according to 
Kant. But what we're looking for is a system of metaphysics to allow us to navigate, philosophically, through 
reality - upon which a system of cognition, and epistemology (and ontology) can be based. 
Kant is not so much concerned with this exercise as he yields to an empricial realist position more or less - 
expanding the position somewhat to include a pirori concepts such as time and space which allow for the 
inclusion of classically rationalist epistemological positions to be satisified with his so-called transcendental 
idealism - but bounded the notion of knowledge itself within the confines of the mind, and cognition, 
effectively. 

A case could be made that this question is irrelevant within Kant's metaphysics given the boundaries within 
which he ascribes to knowledge itself - that it is bound by experience, by the empirical even if it is wed in 
some strange way to a priori, intuitive concepts such as space and time. Nothing can be said to be truly 
known without not only the ground of experience itself (which again he leaves out of his metaphysics), but 
also again without a subjective, embodied experiencer of said experience through which knowledge in any 
form is possible.
What is overlooked then, and perhaops this is not surprising, is the the implicit spatial, time and embodiment 
constraints that encase the entire cognitive, epistemological framework. Within the context of objective 
realism, which was the predominant ontological perspective of the era in question, perhaps almost best 
represented by Kant himself. While he bridged the gap between rationalism and empiricism quite elegantly, 
he pushes the predominant worldview into his transcendental background and then calls these assumptions 
a priori. 
To put it succinctly, what is the source or intellectual ground of Kant's cognitive framework?  From whence it 
came and from whence does its cognitive capabilities, its reasoning capacity really, originate or derive 
from?   Whether or not Kant would deem it a relevant question is of no heed for our argument here, which 
is essentially that Western philosophy is so deeply steeped in objective realism that it lacks the metaphysical 
structure to incorporate and ultimately adequately explain, the nature of experience - being is what the 
ancients called it - itself.
What we are left with, from a metaphysical perspective, is the quite elementary conclusion that there must 
be some ground for the process of cognition itself, from which a human being (or any thinking animal for that 
matter) derives its intelligence so to speak, from which its cognitive capabilities are sourced from, and 
perhaps most importantly to which the cognitive act is defined relative to.  
For again to speak of cognition as the defining feature of man, to construct an epistemological framework 
that is mind driven rather than (transcendental) reality driven so to speak (that things exist in and of 
themselves regardless as to whether or not they are perceived by anyone or anything), we must have some 
sort of metaphysical ground within which this cognitive engine, this rational entity, exists and/or to which 
this act of cognition exists relative to.  The fact that Kant is more concerned with establishing definitive, and 
objectively and empirically focused, boundaries of knowledge itself is - at least for the purposes of our work - 
revealing in its inherent focus on the objective, empirically based and physical sciences as the basis for 
Philosophy, rather than the other way around which is how Aristotle designed his system of philsoohy and 
most certaionly how we are (re)construicting ours here (following Arisitotle).
This is an absolutely critical point and one that on its face seems obvious, and one again that would be 
discounted from an epistemological perspective by Kant given the boundaries of knowledge that he sets 
forth, but a point that is nonetheless pivotal with respect to the task at hand that looks to transform Kant's 
philosophy, expanding it really, such that it is capable of absorbing, subsuming and incorporating 
supraconsciousness as we define it herein, as well as its close cousin Jung's collective unconscious. Both these 
states of being, states of consciousness, are not tied to an embodied form and as such lie outside of Kantian's 
boundary of knowledge. 
What we are suggesting here is that not that his system is wrong or invalid, in fact quite the contrary. We are 
arguing that his system is the most cohesive and rationally founded system of philosophy in the modern era 
but that it is - like the way Einstein described Quantum Mechanics when it was first described - incomplete. 
As such,m it requires a metaphysical extension as it were in order for it to fully encapsulate the entire 
breadth of human experience as it is understood in the postmodern era, evolving along with Psychology and 
Physics to adapt to more collective, holistic and aggregate modes of understanding the human experience 
and the knowledge acaquired therein.

The implication here, and this is profound - and in some sense is itself a rational deduction which in and of 
itself is ironic in a way - is that Reason itself is bound and constrained, and that in order to account for 
mysticism, or God really, in any sort of intellectual framework, any sort of ideological system, we must move 
beyond Reason given said constraints of the tool at hand.  Therefore, in order to create an ontological 
framework which accounts for, and describes in any sort of meaningful way, ideas that are fundamentally 
supra-rational, i.e. God as reflected in fundamentally mystical states of consciousness or being, we must, 
again as a rational deduction of sorts, establish a system that subsumes Reason itself.
Having established the need for a requisite metaphysical or ontological principle within which Kant's 
epistemological framework - again Reason or mind - must be subsumed, by which its existence itself must 
ultimately depend, we then are faced with the task of determining or describing what qualities said 
ontological principle should, or must, have.  But first we shall give it a name.  We shall call this primordial 
metaphysical principle upon which both Kant's theoretical and practical philosophy rests "awareness", 
alluding to the fact that this metaphysical construct requires some sort of consciousness, or other quality of 
being or existence, such that the cognitive process itself which Kant's system of metaphysics, or epistemology 
is constructed upon, can be active, alive and essentially aware, giving it its cognitive properties in a way.  
Awareness then as we understand it, is the necessary (precognitive) dependent metaphysical principle from 
which cognition in any form must depend upon in order for it, i.e. the act of cognition, to have any 
epistemological validity at all.  Awareness is not a cognitive faculty, it's the necessary condition of cognition 
itself - lying in a sense underneath, or ontologically prior to, these faculties of the mind which according to 
Kant facilitate, bound, knowledge of any kind, through the process of cognition.  
In other words, our knowledge of anything at all is not just as a result of cognition alone, as Kant professes, 
but as a result of the entire metaphysical, ontological and epistemological framework upon which both the 
knowledge of said thing depends, and the cognitive framework within which said knowledge is gained or 
acquired as the case may be.  This underlying intellectual structure or paradigm, i.e. our awareness, is 
effectively baked into the cognitive process, implied in a fundamental way, working at a level that is much 
grander and global - from an ontological perspective - than understanding, which is a "local" construct in the 
sense that it is bound by the individual psyche or conscious mind of the person undergoing the experience.  
Awareness operates at a much broader metaphysical perspective and vantage point, not only providing the 
ground of the cognitive experience, but also bringing to bear certain global, larger order intellectual construct 
upon experience itself, contributing to the knowledge that is gained as part of the cognitive process in a way 
that is more profound than understanding.  
Borrowing Cognitive Science and Computer Science terminology, if we think of Kant's mind, the psyche, as a 
state machine of sorts (a theoretical construct akin to the Turing machine in Computer Science which is a 
theoretical model for any computer system) we can think of the faculties of understanding and 
comprehension as providing analytical, synthesizing, categorizing or any other type of process based 
functional algorithm capabilities to the cognitive process, resulting in a change of the properties of said 
subject - the "state" in the state-machine.  This process, this act of cognition, is dependent upon, or operates 
as a function of, attributes or qualities that are specific to the individual entity or being that is "cognizing", as 
conceived of through perception.  
Awareness however, does more than just provide the metaphysical grounding of the experience (even 
though this in and of itself is absolutely critical to the cognitive process, to the extent that cognition, or again 
more generally experience, would not occur without it) it acts as a global aggregate construct that 
encapsulates the experience from a psychological perspective, a collective frame of reference within which 
experience, the act of cognition, is processed through which the result of cognition, i.e. knowledge, is realized 
- using Aristotle's terminology the actualizing principle of knowledge.  Understanding and Awareness then, 
similar to the faculties of perception and comprehension, work together to provide the psychological 
grounding of the experience.  Awareness then, rounds out Kant's metaphysics, providing it with the 
metaphysical and psychological infrastructure for cognition as a knowledge creating, or acquiring, process.  
With Awareness added to Kant's metaphysical, and ultimately epistemological, framework, we have 
established a new metaphysical paradigm which contains, or is dependent upon, an ontological primordial 
principle - i.e. Awareness.  As such, we have established a higher order metaphysical system, or ontological 
paradigm, a Metaphysics of Awareness, which although rests upon Kantian philosophical foundations, 
provides us with a more complete intellectual paradigm within which mind, as an ontological entity through 
which knowledge is gained or acquired, can be more fully understood and appreciated and through which 
higher order principles such as God or supraconsciousness can be more readily explained, from an 
epistemological perspective.  
Our Metaphysics of Awareness suggests, requires really, that there must be a ground of being or Awareness, 
that must exist in order for any experience or act of cognition to occur, and in turn for any form of knowledge 
to be acquired or gained as a result of said experience of act of cognition.  As such, this Awareness must be a 
real thing, an epistemological entity in the sense that without it, the cognitive process from which knowledge 
in any form is derived, is incomplete.  Therefore, as a prerequisite component of the process by which 
knowledge is gained or arrived at, Awareness must in turn be an ontological entity in and of itself, a 
fundamental component of the cognitive process by which knowledge is bound or defined in the abstract, 
metaphysical sense.  The Metaphysics of Awareness then, can and should be understood as a logical 
extension of Kant's metaphysics which establishes mind as the ontological primordial principle within which 
knowledge must be defined in relation to, providing the metaphysical ground for Reason itself, as reflected in 
the cognitive process, something Kant does not account for in any meaningful way.
Furthermore, Awareness provides a collective, aggregate metaphysical construct to the cognitive process 
that not only provides a global context to experience, it also informs the cognitive process itself, reflecting a 
feedback look of sorts that connects the discrete experience with the psyche as an abstract and continuous 
entity or being, defined as the aggregate or sum total of all experiences that it has undergone since its 
inception.  In this context, we can understand awareness as Pirsig's Dynamic Quality, what he calls "pure 
awareness" which represents the very forefront of experience, in its most "raw" form, prior to the 
application of any sort of intellectual paradigm (Pirsig's static Quality, which denotes the intellectual 
paradigm through which experience is processed and ultimately "understood") or any act of cognition.
Awareness is not a purely rational faculty however, in fact it's not really a faculty per se as it sits orthogonal 
to the process of cognition, while again informing it and providing the metaphysical ground for the 
experience to occur.  In this context, Awareness is supra-rational, working with symbols and levels of 
abstraction - Platonic forms almost - that do not have the linear, black and white qualities that are 
characteristic of the faculties of comprehension or understanding for example, cognitive faculties that apply - 
again using our Cognitive and Computer Science analogy - more linear algorithms of grouping, sorting, 
attribute and quality determination, etc.  Awareness provides the supra-rational ground as it were, through 
which the act of cognition, experience, occurs through which knowledge is manifest and vy which it comes to 
be defined.  Awareness as a complementary component of the cognitive process provides the symbolic 
ground within which experience, i.e. knowledge, is absorbed - aggregated and crystallized you might say - 
providing the psychological contextual framework and infrastructure within which the cognitive process can 
elicit meaning from some sensory or rational inputs above and beyond the fairly straightforward process of 
categorization or classification which is the mainstay of Kant's faculties of comprehension and understanding 
primarily.  In this sense, we have now established within the metaphysical model itself, i.e. the Metaphysics 
of Awareness, a psychological repository as it were for not just intellectual paradigms - social or linguistic 
frameworks for example - but for Jungian archetypes, a sort of a priori knowledge that while it is not tied to 
any object or rational paradigm necessarily, is nonetheless social or human focused in its content and shape.  

What we are doing here to Kant's cognitive process, his epistemological framework, is effectively quantizing 
it.  That is to say the Metaphysics of Awareness  is a metaphysical paradigm that is arrived at via the process 
of applying quantum like principles or features to the prevailing epistemological paradigm in Philosophy, a 
paradigm that is intrinsically "Classical" - in the sense that modern Western philosophy, as established by 
Kant primarily, considers knowledge to be a fundamentally "classical" concept - i.e. it's a discrete, measurable 
and quantifiable entity that is the result of a very specific and well defined cognitive process.  With the 
Metaphysics of Awareness, we've added a metaphysical construct to Kant's epistemological framework, 
Awareness, that brings fundamentally quantum like features to the model, after which knowledge can be 
conceived of both as an individualized and discrete "thing" in and of itself, and also at the same time be 
defined more holistically as a result of the (mental) processes of perception, comprehension and 
understanding complemented or augmented by Awareness which brings "non-local" attributes and qualities 
to the experience via its grounding, and meta-defining in a way, function in the cognitive framework itself.  
In other words, now that Awareness has been added as an ontological primordial metaphysical principle to 
Kant's epistemological framework, we have effectively quantized Kant's epistemological framework in that 
now knowledge is no longer just a discrete metaphysical or intellectual construct that is the result of a well-
defined, linear process, but it can be (more properly and completely) conceived of as a multi-tiered or multi-
dimensional principle that while undoubtedly is rooted in the sensory or rational phenomenon which 
"triggers" the experience or act of cognition, but at the same time is informed by supra-psychological 
attributes (Jungian archetypes and collective intellectual paradigms/themes) that reflect the society or even 
humanity as a whole and are not necessarily associated with the individual psyche in any sort of physical, or 
even neurological way.
At an even broader conceptual - and fundamentally (Jungian) Psychological level - Awareness represents that 
supra-physical and supra-psyche ground of being where the aggregate human storehouse of experience 
resides, the defining characteristic of humanity as an organism in and of itself.  As an integral part of the 
feedback loop for individual acts of cognition, Awareness then comes to serve not only the defining attributes 
of the individual, but also the defining attributes of the collective, seen as an aggregate psycho-physiological 
organism as it were.  Here we have these attributes of Awareness that align it quite nicely, from an 
intellectual and metaphysical perspective, to Quantum Theory.  For just as with Quantum Theory, if we 
extrapolate its theoretical foundations to metaphysics, with Metaphysics of Awareness, knowledge is both 
individual state based - emerging from a specific act of cognition related to a specific event, object or thought 
- and also at the same time is informed by both the totality of the intellectual landscape and paradigm of the 
mind through which cognition takes place.  This experience through which knowledge is created as described 
or modelled in the Metaphysics of Awareness is akin to the way quanta, as a particle-wave, is informed, or 
implicitly aware, of its environment - by which for example the quanta knows about the slits in the famous 
double-slit experiment and can navigate its way through them as needed, according to the stochastic models 
that underpin Quantum Theory.  
In this epistemological  framework, knowledge exists both as a discrete product as it were of the individual 
psyche, and at the same time exists as part of a composite whole - knowledge manifesting both as it emerges 
within the individual psyche and also participating in and contributing to - again through a constant 
information feedback loop of sorts - collective knowledge as it is stored and captured within Awareness which 
functions across the entire human cognitive landscape.  Furthermore, like Quantum Theory, our Metaphysics 
of Awareness is fundamentally non-local, as understood from an epistemological perspective again, in that 
knowledge is a function of not only the "object" of cognition - be it a rational formula or some result of 
perception or a synthetic of the two - but also a function of the overarching intellectual and ontological 
ground of knowledge itself, i.e. Awareness.  In this way, we can look at the Metaphysics of Awareness as a 
quantum revolution of philosophy in much the same way as Kant's philosophy reflected a so-called 
Copernican revolution of philosophy - with his inversion of the epistemological foundation effectively being 
analogous to our quantizing of his metaphysics.
Also, as we have hinted at already, now that we have extended Kant's metaphysics to include a ground of the 
cognitive, knowledge acquisition, process, and established Awareness as a metaphysical and ontological 
principle, we have the opportunity to fully integrate Psychology into the cognitive process, taking advantage 
of the advancements in this field since Kant established his Metaphysics of Morals at the end of the 
Enlightenment.  Given the quantized nature of the Metaphysics of Awareness though, we lean less on 
Freudian psychology and its behavioristic, really mechanistic, conception of mind, but more Jungian 
psychology given its more holistic approach to the understanding of human, individual behavior as (at least 
partially) as a function of or as it relates to the vast reservoir of ideas, mythos, and archetypes, which are 
drawn from what he called the collective unconscious, which is in a way a close corollary of our Awareness.  
In this context, we shall establish what we will call the interconnectedness principle which is derived from the 
fact that Awareness provides the metaphysical connection for not just individual consciousness or cognition, 
but for all beings, all existence (all beings that are capable of cognition essentially), effectively linking all of 
these sentient beings that leverage and utilize this collective, aggregate, metaphysical, and psychological 
principle of Awareness for cognition - a rational deduction as it were from our Metaphysics of Awareness as 
we have described it thus far.  In this context, this interconnectedness principle can also be seen as the 
driving force behind Jung's concept of individuation, the process by which the psyche merges with and 
assimilates archetypes from the collective unconscious and thereby psychologically becomes fully formed or 
complete, i.e. individualized.  
With respect to Freudian psychology, we can understand his notion of desire as the driving force of behavior, 
a construct which underpins his psychological theoretical framework more or less, as a mechanical and 
behavioristic reflection of a more fundamental human desire to be unified with Awareness, the very ground 
of experience itself.  It can be understood in this context as reflective of the very fundamental desire to be 
"whole" again, i.e. to be integrated with Awareness itself.  This is the very same principle, the same 
motivating force - i.e. desire - that we find in Hellenic mythos as Eros, one of the primordial deities which not 
only brings the kosmos into existence, but also - according to both Plato and Aristotle in fact - is responsible 
at some level for keeping it together, as the motivating principle behind order and reason, i.e. the Judeo-
Christian Logos again.
Furthermore, with this principle of Awareness that sits at the very heart of our new metaphysics, we now 
have established an intellectual bridge not only for Eastern philosophy and Western philosophy, but also a 
metaphysical ground for mysticism as a Psychological experience - as Awareness represents, is the 
metaphysical and ontological equivalent of, the penultimate ontological principle of Eastern philosophy, i.e. 
what is variously referred to as samādhi in Yoga, nirvana in the Buddhist tradition, and Satcitānanda in the 
Upanishads.  Satcitānanda is probably the most fitting term as these Eastern philosophical constructs relate 
to the Metaphysics of Awareness given that the word is a composite in the Sanskrit of almost all of the 
underlying philosophical, and really intellectual, paradigms that come together with and under Awareness as 
an ontological first principle - sat, "being" or "existing", cit, "to perceive", "understand" or "know", and 
ananda, "happiness", "pleasure", or "bliss".  The most common translation of this esoteric, and 
fundamentally mystical, concept is Existence-Knowledge-Bliss-Absolute, vocabulary which has clear 
alignment with the Western philosophical, epistemological, ontological, psychological and of course 
theological theoretical frameworks (bliss, ananda, having clear Freudian connotations, and then sat with 
almost a direct line of site into the Greek óntōs from which the discipline of ontology gets its name) that we 
are effectively able to integrate with our Metaphysics of Awareness.  In Upanishadic philosophy, 
Satcitānanda is equated with the source of knowledge, the very ground of being itself as a theological and 
metaphysical principle. In this sense, Satcitānanda is Awareness - simply resting in a different metaphysical, 
cultural, and linguistic framework (albeit still Indo-European). 
In the words of Max Planck, one of the greatest Physicists of the 20th century by any measure (words which 
you won't find in any Physics textbook mind you):

All matter originates and exists only by virtue of a force which brings the particle of an atom to vibration and 
holds this most minute solar system of the atom together.  We must assume behind this force the existence of a 
conscious and intelligent mind.  This mind is the matrix of all matter. 

Once it has been established that the penultimate ontological first principle of Eastern philosophy (primarily 
Indian philosophy but also in the Chinese philosophical tradition as well with the Dao perhaps representing 
the best example) is in fact Awareness, we not only have established a metaphysical bridge between Eastern 
and Western philosophy, but also by combining the discipline of Psychology directly into the intellectual 
architecture as it were, we establish Awareness as not just an epistemological and ontological entity, a 
requisite metaphysical truth, but as an experiential reality.  In other words, in the Metaphysics of Awareness, 
Awareness is not only the necessary precondition for all knowledge as it is conceived in Kant's cognitive 
framework, it can also be leveraged to establish, and explain, the fundamental truths of the longstanding 
mystical practices and disciplines that are a hallmark of the Eastern philosophical traditions, as a 
Psychological phenomenon in and of itself.  
Awareness in this capacity, from a Psychological perspective, can be viewed as the fulfillment of the ultimate 
desire, that which forms the basis of humanity in a way, i.e. the direct and complete integration of the psyche 
with Awareness - or perhaps better put as the dissolution of the psyche, the mind, into the state of pure, 
unadulterated Awareness, which is what we have called throughout supraconsciousness.  Desire fulfillment 
then, in this mystical context which is so fundamental to Eastern philosophy, is preserved but desire is 
understood as a theological imperative, one that has been expressed for millennia as reflected by the 
cosmogonic mythos of ancient man, with universal creation being conceived as, from a mystical standpoint at 
least, the journey back up the metaphysical paradigm as it were straight through to Awareness itself where 
individuation, in its absolution, is fully realized.  This Psychological interpretation of experience, which in turn 
provides the basis for knowledge and truth, is an integral aspect of the Metaphysics of Awareness, one of its 
defining features in fact.  This Psychological bent if we may call it that, allows for (and in a way is being 
pursued within the more modern discipline of Cognitive Science which is very much influenced by Philosophy, 
and in particular Kantian philosophy) what we might call the Science of the mind to be established as an 
interdisciplinary practice as it were - where Psychology, Philosophy, theology and mysticism can at the very 
least be looked upon as somewhat inter-related disciplines.  To say this in a different way, in the Quantum 
Era any complete map of reality, a description of the totality of being in all its forms, should be required to 
incorporate the full depiction of the nature of mind as it is understood not just in the (Western) Psychological 
sense, but also in the sense of the Eastern theo-philosophical traditions as well - a longstanding tradition 
which reaches back into the very depths of antiquity which posit mind not just as a mechanistic and 
biochemical and neurological "system", but as a reflection of the eternal and ever present substratum of 
existence itself.  
This Psychological reality, this metaphysics of mind, forces us to recast our epistemological position, as this 
ground of being - Awareness - is not only conceived of as a "real" thing in and of itself, from an 
epistemological and in turn ontological perspective, and as such reflects a certain kind of higher order 
knowledge, but also represents the very foundations of knowledge itself from which all forms of knowledge, 
all reality even, is based.  This principle, i.e. Awareness then, in a way reflects the fundamental divide 
between Eastern and Western philosophy, and arguably represents the very heart of the divide between 
Religion and Science - from an epistemological perspective  at least - and yet we can and do effectively close 
this gap if we adopt the Metaphysics of Awareness as our ontological and epistemological framework.  In 
other words, in order to establish a full and complete intellectual system which covers all aspects of reality, 
establishing the grounds for a more comprehensive and complete ontology, the prototypical reductionist 
Western worldview and the holistic worldview that is characteristic of the East should be looked at as 
complementary and orthogonal domains of knowledge, different perspectives on the same reality, not as 
alternative mutually exclusive domains of truth which unfortunately they are typically conceived as.  
This integrated framework then opens all sorts of doors to understanding - and incorporating and 
synthesizing - all sorts and kinds of theological and metaphysical conceptions of reality that have been put 
forth through the ages since the dawn of civilization.  From a Western metaphysics perspective for example, 
we can see Bohm's conception of the implicate order and explicate order as an analogy here, where the 
realm of God, i.e. theology, is reflective of the implicate order that underlies the physical universe and the 
underlying explicate order realities that are described in Physics - one for Classical Mechanics and another for 
Quantum Mechanics - and even another explicate, albeit higher order, of Reason itself which is the domain of 
Philosophy, and in turn the sub-discipline of metaphysics.  
Metaphysics of Awareness can also be used to contemplate and understand various forms of ancient 
theology and metaphysics in fact.  For example, the Stoic notion of corporealism, the notion that everything 
is "alive" and "animated" and is permeated with divine consciousness, from which the Christian concept of 
the Holy Spirit is derived, through the Stoic pneuma, can now be seen as a theological and philosophical (and 
classically Hellenic) description of Awareness as it is viewed in the Metaphysics of Awareness.  Furthermore, 
we can come to a better understanding of the Indian philosophical conception of knowledge, which holds 
that there exists a "higher" form of knowledge, the direct experience of Satcitānanda or Brahman, from 
which lower forms of knowledge - like for example objective realism or even Quantum Mechanics - become 
intellectually tenable.  The Metaphysics of Awareness is in a sense a mystic metaphysics that provides a 
cognitive and rational intellectual paradigm through which we can come to a greater understanding of the 
Neo-Platonic One for example, as well as its close corollaries the Divine Intellect and the Soul, which - like 
the Christian Trinity - can be viewed as a triad of theological principles through which Awareness, at both the 
individual and collective level, is explained.
Perhaps most importantly however, we now have a framework within which theology and metaphysics - 
Religion and Science - are established on common intellectual ground as it were, bound together with this 
notion of Awareness which is both local and specific to the individual psyche or mind (as is presumed and 
reflected in the domain of Science) and at the same time non-local and reflective of Jung's collective 
unconscious, the repository of human archetypes and mythos (which is reflected in Religion more or less).  
Once this connection is established, this further abstraction of metaphysics which provides a grounding for 
cognition, i.e. Awareness, we now have the metaphysical and ontological basis for both Western philosophy, 
which now includes Psychology, and Eastern philosophy, which includes mysticism.  Furthermore, morality 
now is not just a rational deduction, a characteristic of man as a rational being as Kant establishes in his 
philosophy as a metaphysical deduction as it were, but now is even further reinforced as a logical conclusion 
based upon the metaphysical and ontological interconnectedness of all beings whose existence both depends 
and relies on Awareness, which provides the ground of both individual existence and collective existence 
more broadly.  

To further illustrate and elucidate upon the implications of establishing Awareness as an ontological first 
principle as it were, the archetype of archetypes, we can look at the classic philosophical ontological 
argument through the lens of the Metaphysics of Awareness, where the existence of God is (attempted to be) 
established based upon pure Reason as it were - a topic that is front and center in Descartes's Meditations on 
First Philosophy for example - we have something like the following:
i.	existence is a real thing, i.e. an epistemological reality,
ii.	if anything exists, it is "I", from which the notion of existence in and of itself is defined,
iii.	I am a thinking, cognitive being,
iv.	thought is a characteristic of existence, i.e. being itself (ontology),
v.	ideas exist (Plato, Aristotle)
vi.	the universe is inherently rational (Physics, cosmogony, Logos, Nous, etc.)
vii.	The rational ground of the universe is what we call metaphysics, i.e. Philosophy,
viii.	there must exist a metaphysical ground of thought, i.e. Awareness,
ix.	Awareness is the primordial ontological first principle, i.e. arche,
x.	The primordial first principle, again arche, equates to the Abrahamic conception of God, 
establishing the grounds for theology

While Kant is certainly correct, from a rational perspective, in pointing out that the existence of God as the 
penultimate intellectual idealistic abstraction, the unmoved mover as it were, is predicated upon the 
assertion that I, and its corollary thought, exist, it nonetheless can also be held to be true that if anything at 
all exists, it would be I as a contemplative, reflective being - a further abstraction of Descartes's cogito ergo 
sum in a sense.  Yes, the argument is circular, and Kant is surely right from an epistemological and ontological 
standpoint that all existence, all knowledge, must be viewed within the context of this "thinking thing" - as 
reflected in Kant's cognitive epistemology - but nonetheless, and as Kant himself argues, once this is 
established, then God - or more broadly theology - becomes a necessary condition of existence, an 
epistemological truth, even if only as a rational byproduct of existence itself, which as we point out also in 
and of itself must exist if we take the existence of I as a fundamental postulate.  
Another way of saying this would be that if Physics true, if metaphysics is true, if mathematics is true, if logic 
is true, then we must yield that truth does in fact exist - be it a subjective, cognitive property of mind 
(according to Kant) or an empirical or rational truth that exists independently of any act of cognition or 
human agency as the Enlightenment Era rationalists posited.  And therefore, there must be an ideological 
basis for its existence which ultimately, no matter what we decide or want to call it, effectively equates with 
THE penultimate principle, or first principle, upon which truth itself in all its forms rests.  This is God 
metaphysically speaking.
In summary then, what we end up with as a result of establishing our Metaphysics of Awareness is the 
following set of principles, or tenets: 
	there must exist a ground of cognitive experience which we call Awareness, a psycho-physiological 
construct that provides the metaphysical basis of cognition, of knowledge, 
	this Awareness is equivalent to Jung's collective unconscious, the storehouse of archetypes and 
mythos not just for the individual, but for the "collective" - i.e. society, culture, humanity - as a 
whole
	through Awareness we can deduce the existence of an interconnectedness principle upon which the 
ground of all existence, all being (ontology) is based,
	morality now is further reinforced by this interconnectedness principle, "others" - beings that exist 
outside of yourself, no longer have any metaphysical or philosophical significance.  Everything is 
connected in a ground of Awareness.
	morality is expanded upon to include all forms of life, as well as the planet which is effectively a 
biological organism that is grounded in the same Awareness upon which our consciousness rests.  
This interconnectedness principle then allows for an expansion of morality into areas beyond human 
affairs- given their mutual interdependency and connectedness in this ground of Awareness,
	Philosophy and Psychology are integrated within Metaphysics of Awareness as complimentary 
disciplines resting upon the concept of Awareness, a reflection of Jung's collective unconscious - 
storehouse for archetypes and mythos
	Eastern and Western philosophy, as well as the more modern discipline of mysticism, are also 
integrated with Metaphysics of Awareness, again all connected via the principle of Awareness that 
rests not only as the ground of the cognition by the human mind, but as an ontological first principle 
upon which Metaphysics of Awareness fundamentally rests.  Supraconsciousness is Awareness.

Awareness then is an ontological first principle that is required for being and cognition in and of themselves 
as intellectual and metaphysical constructs, effectively connecting the two not just from a metaphysical 
perspective but also ontologically as well.  And, with respect to the distinctively Eastern philosophical and 
mystical implications of Metaphysics of Awareness, Awareness itself is not just an ontological construct, 
existing as an entity - a being - in and of itself, but also can be experienced directly, undiluted by cognition so 
to speak.  On this basis, with this extension to Kant's philosophy, we are able to integrate not just Eastern 
philosophy and Western philosophy, arguably a monumental philosophical feat in and of itself, but also 
mysticism as well in the broadest sense as the direct experience of the ground of existence, the ground of 
being, i.e. Awareness, which viewed through the intellectual lens of theology is again equivalent to God.
The paradigm shift that we make here with the Metaphysics of Awareness, is that reality, being in its most 
essential form, is not reductionist, even though this type of thinking may be extraordinarily powerful as it 
relates to Science.  Or to say it differently, the reductionist worldview that is such a fundamental 
characteristic of Science and Western philosophy in general represents truth at a lower order level of 
existence or reality (using Bohm's conceptual framework of implicate and explicate order from an 
epistemological perspective as an analogy again), and at the same time there exists a higher order level or 
dimension or reality or existence, ontologically prior as it were, from which lower forms of knowledge and 
existence depend or are predicated upon.  
In the holistic perspective of the world, this more fundamental perspective of Being in a Platonic sense, it is 
change or process that is primary - at least from a physical standpoint.  And the physical reality that we can 
see and touch, the foundation of empirical reality as defined by the empiricists can be understood as the 
holomovement of Bohm or the yi of the ancient Chinese which underpins the Yìjīng and in turn forms the 
basis of Chinese philosophy.  Awareness is not a thing outside of the universal order and nature - outside of 
us, outside the world - it permeates all of creation, a truth that was self-evident to the first philosophers in 
antiquity as it is reflected in virtually all of the major the-philosophical traditions that we have covered in this 
work - Hellenic, Chinese and Indian primarily.
This is in fact how these typically reductionist versus holistic worldviews were once conceived at the very 
beginning of the philosophical journey as it were - by the likes of Plato and Aristotle for example, or on the 
Eastern front by Lǎozǐ or Śaṅkara, or even earlier as conceived by the authors of the Upanishads, the so-
called rishis, or in the Far East as reflected again in the Yìjīng - all being representative from a philosophical 
standpoint of both reductionist and holistic ontological paradigms simultaneously.  But this was back when 
mankind's relationship with truth and knowledge was symbolic, reflected in the belief of the underlying truth 
of mythos in antiquity, despite its allegorical approach to conveying said truth (allegoresis) which was the 
prevalent mode of thought, belief system, in the days before philosophy, philosophia or Reason, as the 
dominant intellectual lens through which truth, or reality, were construed.  
Implicit in mankind's intellectual journey from symbolism, metaphor, and myth to linguistic specificity of the 
written word where again Reason was looked upon as the benchmark of knowledge and truth, was the loss of 
the mystery of creation, which by its very nature does not lend itself to a reductionist, objective realist, 
framework of understanding - an unintended consequence of (rational) progress as it were.  This mystical 
progression of words to thoughts to ideas to what Pirsig and so many other sages and prophets in the history 
of mankind, be they considered to be true mystics or not, have experienced which provide us not only with 
the grounds for Religion, as a prophetic revelation, but also (and this is oft overlooked) but also the grounds 
for the very height of philosophia.  At least this is how this progression was conceived in Hellenic antiquity, an 
exercise which was considered to be not just rational, but a reflection of (cosmic) wisdom, i.e. sophia, which 
ultimately at its summit merged with the source of creation itself.  
This notion of Awareness then, which in Hellenic antiquity was referred to primarily as being in and of itself 
(i.e. Platonic Being) was not only considered to be an experiential phenomenon, but also understood as the 
very ground of thought, the ground of ideas in and of themselves as abstract concepts, as well as the ground 
of existence from an ontological perspective, at least in the Platonic tradition.  From this vantage point, from 
an epistemological perspective, ideas are understood as higher order constructs, archetypes, that reflect 
universal order, which in turn rest and depend upon an intellectual and metaphysical ground of Awareness.  
In this context, things - objects or physical reality - reflect a lower order construct, ontologically speaking, 
than ideas, which again rest in the ground of Awareness.  In a sense then, the Metaphysics of Awareness can 
be seen as idealistic - again in the Platonic sense - but its inherent idealism is not as an epistemological 
imperative, but an ontological paradigm within which both ideas and objective reality are both seen as real, 
or true/  
This is what the Neo-Platonists had right, and the Gnostics as well, from which we have the notion of Nous, 
Logos, and the Divine Intellect - each representing that primordial ordering force which underpinned, and 
was the source of, universal creation, and at the same time permeates it and binds it together in a sense - at 
least from an metaphysical perspective.  Although that which truly binds it, what the Stoics and even the 
Christians had right in this sense, is not an intellectual construct, even though it may, and no doubt does, 
reflect a fundamentally divine sense of order, but is "spiritual" in a sense, because the totality of being, the 
universe, is fundamentally alive, i.e. is "aware".  This very fundamental (metaphysical, ontological and 
theological) idea goes back to the early Indo-Europeans, from which we have inherited the notion of divine 
and its relationship with breath, or spirit - Holy Spirit, pneuma, prāṇa, etc.- aligning directly to Awareness as a 
primordial first principle in the Metaphysics of Awareness. 

In conclusion then, while the written word represents arguably one of the defining, and most influential, of 
all of mankind's inventions, in its Indo-European variant it nonetheless carries with it reductionist, i.e. 
objective realist metaphysical implications.  So while the written word no doubt represents the most 
significant technological innovation of ancient man that provides the intellectual architecture, the building 
blocks really, of philosophy in antiquity which in turn forms the basis of Philosophy and Science in the post 
Enlightenment Era, a fundamental source of much of its expressive and intellectual power as it were, it 
nonetheless limits our understanding to a large degree of the bigger picture.  In this sense, if we look at 
Religion and Science not as separate domains of knowledge (with never the two shall meet so to speak) but if 
we see them as different perspectives on the world order through this lens of holistic versus reductionist 
ontologies, as again is reflected and captured in the Metaphysics of Awareness, we see a much more 
complete picture of the world where the Eastern and Western vantage points serve as complimentary 
intellectual domains, two parts and perspectives on the entire domain of knowledge for the entire human 
experience - the Yīn-Yáng of the entire expanse of human knowledge as it were rather than mutually 
exclusive domains of truth.
The Metaphysics of Awareness then, is a sort of metaphysical synthetic that leverages some of the very 
fundamental principles that rest at the heart of ancient philosophy, i.e. philosophia which subsumed 
theology, prior to the division between Eastern and Western philosophy which is so fundamental to the 
philosophical landscape today.  The Metaphysics of Awareness reflects a more holistic conception of the 
universal world order, a worldview that was predominant well before ontology, epistemology, theology or 
metaphysics even existed as intellectual constructs much less specific domains of knowledge in and of 
themselves, when the now more predominant, Western, reductionist worldview - baked into the language 
itself - had yet to take over the intellectual landscape.  And as such the Metaphysics of Awareness implies a 
reality that reflects first order principles of unity and emanation, principles that rest at the very heart of 
ancient philosophy in virtually all its forms- back to the beginning as it were.  We can also quite powerfully 
draw a line between the Metaphysics of Awareness and Physics, with the so-called Ontological Interpretation 
of Quantum Mechanics as established from within the Physics community itself by David Bohm with his pilot-
wave theory, which in its fullest and most mature form is referred to as Bohmian Mechanics, or de Broglie-
Bohm theory - the mathematics of which was firmly established to be consistent with both Quantum 
Mechanics and Classical Mechanics decades ago.  Nonetheless, given the state of affairs in the global 
community at present, it is well worth a new consideration, especially given the proliferation of Eastern 
philosophy and mysticism as we move well into the 21st century.  
While this specific interpretation, really formulation, of Quantum Mechanics, does not necessarily change its 
fundamental characteristics and/or mathematical foundations, it nonetheless adds the notion of quantum 
potential to its mathematical foundations, placing it on deterministic foundations even if it relaxes the notion 
of locality which is so fundamental to Classical Mechanics.  One could certainly make the argument, and 
Bohm himself does to a certain degree, that Bohmian Mechanics adds the notion of Awareness into the very 
heart of Quantum Mechanics, as the metaphysical and ontological ground to his conception of undivided 
wholeness.  This is the Metaphysics of Awareness, a Philosophical rendition of Bohm's undivided wholeness as 
it were, a new metaphysics for the Quantum Era whereby the very height of Western philosophy is integrated 
with the very height of Eastern philosophy.  Where the dualism of Kant and the non-dualism of Śaṅkara is 
fully integrated within a single metaphysical and epistemological paradigm which provides the rational 
foundations for not only Philosophy and Psychology, but for theology and mysticism as well - establishing the 
rational foundations for God as a necessary condition to existence and aligning Philosophy with ancient 
mythos as it has been conceived since the very origins of civilization.  
With the Metaphysics of Awareness we have established Awareness as an ontological first principle, a 
Psychological and Philosophical imperative that provides the foundation for all of existence, for all 
knowledge.  For the Age of Reason is now officially behind us, and we must, desperately, usher in a new Era - 
the Quantum Era.  And let it be ushered in properly not by Physics, Psychology or Religion - but by 
Philosophy, like every Era should be.  Whereby we may finally establish the verity of Awareness as the 
metaphysical ground of existence itself, a new epistemological framework that is grounded not just in 
Philosophy, but in Physics as well, through mathematics, the holy grail of philosophy and theology since the 
very dawn of civilization in the West.