
As a specific example of how a word, a concept, can be disfigured and lose its fullness and richness of 
meaning as it moves through successive languages of translation and cultural evolution, let's look at how the 
Hebrew word Torah, which carries so much significance in the Jewish community, has come to be more 
understood as law or custom rather than the full revealed and complete theological and spiritual framework 
that it implied to not just its original author, Moses, but also to the audience to which the treatise was 
originally compiled and transcribed in the ancient Hebrew.  
For example, the Torah is sometimes loosely translated into English simply as "law" or "the law", coming 
from the Greek word for law, or "Nómos" (νόμος).  Nómos is a fairly loaded term in Greek antiquity that plays 
a very prominent role in classical Hellenic philosophy.  To the Hebrews, their governance structure, the 
guiding social structure of their people, is established and rationalized via the narrative and stories in the 
Torah, hence the inclination to use the Greek Nómos as a transliteration of the underlying purpose of the 
text.  In many respects, this concept is analogous to the Ma'at of the ancient Egyptians which is the deity and 
notion that provides the rational foundation, and mythological tradition, that provides the basis for balance 
and harmony, justice and "law", in human affairs.
The word "Torah" in Hebrew is derived from a root that means to "guide" or "teach", so a good translation 
for the word directly into English might be "teaching", "doctrine", or "instruction".  But in the Greek 
Septuagint, which was transcribed in the first or second century BC in old Koine Greek by a group of Jewish 
scholars at the behest of Ptolemy II (309 -246 BCE) in Alexandrian Egypt which by that time had been infused 
with Hellenic culture.  In the Septuagint, or simply the LXX, the Hebrew word "torah" was translated into 
Greek to as Nómos, which in fact is the Greek word for "law" or "custom".  In Hellenic intellectual and 
philosophical circles however, Nómos had a much more complex and rich meaning.  A Greek Orphic hymn to 
the god Nómos illustrates its depth of meaning of this concept to the Ancient Greeks, a tradition that 
undoubtedly was in the minds of the translators of the LXX:

The holy king of gods and men I call, heavenly Nómos, the righteous seal of all: the seal which stamps whatever 
the earth contains, and all concealed within the liquid plains: stable, and starry, of harmonious frame, 
preserving laws eternally the same. Thy all-composing power in heaven appears, connects its frame, and props 
the starry spheres; and unjust envy shakes with dreadful sound, tossed by thy arm in giddy whirls around. 'Tis 
thine the life of mortals to defend, and crown existence with a blessed end; for thy command alone, of all that 
lives, order and rule to every dwelling goes. Ever observant of the upright mind, and of just actions the 
companion kind. Foe to the lawless, with avenging ire, their steps involving in destruction dire. Come, blest, 
abundant power, whom all reverse, by all desired, with favouring mind draw near; give me through life on thee 
to fix my sight, and never forsake the equal paths of right. 

So Nómos then, at the time that the Hebrew Old Testament was transcribed into Greek, is very much akin to 
the Ma'at of the Egyptians, the personification of which becomes and is synthesized with the (Orphic) Greek 
notion of Nómos.  Having said that, given how steeped in tradition and custom the Jewish faith is, still 
following today in many respects the ways and customs of the ancient Hebrews that was codified and 
captured in the teachings of Moses, one can certainly see why the Greek Jewish scholars in the 3rd century 
BCE used this word.  
The translation of torah then Nómos, and in turn to the its Latin successor lex, which has a much more direct 
association with our modern conception of "law", has historically given rise to the notion that Torah signifies 
or emphasizes laws or customs rather than the implying the complete historical and socio-religious narrative 
captured in the scripture of the Jewish faith, i.e. "teaching" where torah is not just the law that governs 
human affairs but the law, and underlying order, of the cosmos which in turn human affairs should be aligned 
and consistent with.  
This history or etymology of the phrase, "Law of the Hebrews" which we find in modern readings of the 
subject and is associated with the Torah illustrates how the richness of meaning and fullness of the original 
word in the original language developed over the centuries and effectively "stuck".  But the true meaning of 
the word and its relation to the Jewish faith in general is best understood when looking more closely at its 
etymology.  Words and ideas lead to understanding, or misunderstanding as the case may be, just as Plato 
has told us.

Christianity and Islam are the most widespread and influential religions in the world today by any measure, 
and both sprung from and were heavily influenced by the monotheistic traditions, and metaphysical and 
philosophical systems, that preceded them - most notably Judaism, but Zoroastrianism as a close and far less 
recognizable second.  These influences are evident by the obvious incorporation of Judaic mythology and 
tradition directly into the canonical version of the Bible as we know it today, along with the explicit 
references to the Abrahamic prophetic lineage, including Jesus himself, in the Qurʾān.  Less explicitly 
however, we find the incorporation of many of the theological themes and divine principles of Zoroastrianism 
integrated into Christian belief systems, perhaps not surprisingly so given the Persian influence in the region 
that Jesus was born and taught in.
The written tradition upon which the Jewish religion, or religion of the Hebrews as it was called in antiquity, 
is based upon what is called in Jewish circles the Tanakh, which corresponds to the canon of the Hebrew 
Bible, what we have come to know as the Old Testament, which includes the Torah, or Books of Moses".  The 
Torah represents the heart of the Jewish written and historical tradition and rests squarely on the writings 
and teachings attributed directly to the prophet Moses, a pseudo-mythological and historical figure who 
lived, if we believe in his historicity at all, sometime in the middle of the 2nd millennium BCE.  
The written tradition also includes "non-canonical" writings, specifically a companion tradition of rabbinic 
commentary which is called the Talmud which consists of commentaries upon the Jewish faith on topics 
ranging from law, ethics and customs, theology and philosophy, as well as history and mythology, and 
provides the basis, along with the Tanakh, for Jewish law.  According to the Talmud, much of the contents of 
the Tanakh were compiled by the "Men of the Great Assembly" in the middle of the 5th century BCE.  While 
this date of composition is the topic of much debate in modern scholarship, most scholars of ancient history 
would agree that the Tanakh in its present form was shaped for the most part in or around the 2nd century 
BCE.   The origins of some of the writings however, particularly in Genesis, clearly have origins that can be 
placed much further back in antiquity.  
The Tanakh and Talmud were mostly written in Biblical Hebrew, although some parts written in Aramaic, a 
closely related Semitic language.  Ancient Hebrew and Aramaic (as well as Arabic) are in the Afro-
Asiatic/Semitic family of languages, a distinct branch of the language tree from the Indo-European languages 
from which almost all modern European languages descend, a branch which includes English of course. 
Judaism has its roots deep in ancient history, and in many respects represents one of the oldest and most 
well documented ancient theological traditions.  Some of the historical narrative of the Old Testament can be 
placed well back into the second millennium BCE judging by the historical evidence from within the text itself, 
as well as corroborating archeological and other historical (written) evidence which supports at least some of 
the historical narrative in the text.  
Judaism today, and from its outset upon its founding by the pseudo-historical prophet Moses, teaches that 
there is only one God and no other God is to be worshipped other than He, namely Yahweh and that he, 
through Moses and the line of prophets descendant from him, has outlined very specifically how the 
Hebrews should conduct themselves and how they should organize and structure their faith and worship.  
The Jewish mode of worship, its religious practices and ritual, and even its ethical and moral precepts, are 
based upon both this written tradition as encapsulated in the Tanakh and Talmud but also a vibrant and 
lasting oral tradition as well which is referred to as the "Oral Torah" and is to be studied in conjunction with 
the written word, with the assistance of a competent Hebrew scholar and teacher (i.e. a Rabbi) in order for 
full appreciation and understanding of the teachings to be realized.
The Tanakh is broken down into three different parts or sections, almost all of which were included in the 
Christian Biblical canon as part of what we have come to know as the Old Testament.  We first have the 
Torah, or again the "teaching" which is directly attributed to Moses, then the Nevi'im or "prophets", and then 
finally the Ketuvim or "writings", the sum total of which represents the written teachings of the ancient 
Hebrews which is looked upon even today by the Jewish community as the guiding principles for the leading 
of a good and just life in the eyes of God (Yahweh).
The Torah consists of five books, all of which are attributed to Moses and all of which are believed by modern 
scholars to have been written by one individual - hence the Five Books of Moses'.  In the Hellenic 
philosophical tradition, we find these books referred to as the Pentateuch, literally "five books" in Greek and 
as they come down to us through the canonization of the Bible, we have come to know these as these books 
as the first five books of the Old Testament, namely Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers and Deuteronomy.  
In Hebrew, the original language of the Torah, each of the books is known by the first prominent word or 
phrase in each book, a custom that was common in antiquity, and sometimes in the Hebrew intellectual and 
theological tradition we see the books referred to by their Hebrew names which are:
1.	Bereshit (בְּרֵאשִׁית, literally "In the beginning"), i.e.  Genesis
2.	Shemot (שִׁמוֹת, literally "Names"), i.e.  Exodus
3.	Vayikra (ויקרא, literally "And He called") i.e.  Leviticus
4.	Bəmidbar (במדבר, literally "In the desert [of]"), i.e.  Numbers
5.	Devarim (דברים, literally "Things" or "Words"), i.e. Deuteronomy 
In these books, Moses tells the story of the creation of the world and mankind, down through the origination 
and lineage of the Hebrews, culminating in a detailed pseudo-historical account of the life of Moses himself 
and the famed story of the leading of the Hebrews out of Egypt by Moses as told in Exodus.  It starts 
however, in the first few verses of Genesis, with the famed creation of the world in 7 days, perhaps the most 
well-known and commented on passage from any text in the history of mankind:
1 In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth.
2 And the earth was without form, and void; and darkness was upon the face of the deep. And the Spirit of God 
moved upon the face of the waters.
3 And God said, Let there be light: and there was light.
4 And God saw the light, that it was good: and God divided the light from the darkness.
5 And God called the light Day, and the darkness he called Night. And the evening and the morning were the 
first day.
6 And God said, Let there be a firmament in the midst of the waters, and let it divide the waters from the 
waters.
7 And God made the firmament, and divided the waters which were under the firmament from the waters 
which were above the firmament: and it was so.
8 And God called the firmament Heaven. And the evening and the morning were the second day.
9 And God said, Let the waters under the heaven be gathered together unto one place, and let the dry land 
appear: and it was so.
10 And God called the dry land Earth; and the gathering together of the waters called the Seas: and God saw 
that it was good.
11 And God said, Let the earth bring forth grass, the herb yielding seed, and the fruit tree yielding fruit after his 
kind, whose seed is in itself, upon the earth: and it was so.
12 And the earth brought forth grass, and herb yielding seed after his kind, and the tree yielding fruit, whose 
seed was in itself, after his kind: and God saw that it was good.
13 And the evening and the morning were the third day.
14 And God said, Let there be lights in the firmament of the heaven to divide the day from the night; and let 
them be for signs, and for seasons, and for days, and years:
15 And let them be for lights in the firmament of the heaven to give light upon the earth: and it was so.
16 And God made two great lights; the greater light to rule the day, and the lesser light to rule the night: he 
made the stars also.
17 And God set them in the firmament of the heaven to give light upon the earth,
18 And to rule over the day and over the night, and to divide the light from the darkness: and God saw that it 
was good.
19 And the evening and the morning were the fourth day. 

In this creation narrative, one that no doubt has shaped the theological beliefs of Western society for some 
2000 years at least, we have the formulation of structure and time as underpinnings for the story itself - God 
creates the world in seven days - but we also see the emanation of various basic universal elements, and 
then the heaven and earth itself, that emerge from the "primordial waters", a very old cosmological motif 
that is virtually ubiquitous in ancient civilization of the Middle, Near and Far East.  
But core to this narrative in fact, and underlining the Judeo-Christian world-view (which in turn is shared by 
the Muslim tradition despite its basic disagreement with its Judeo-Christian brethren on the relative 
importance of various prophets and basic theological stances such as the Holy Trinity and its implications on 
the underlying unity of God/Allāh) is the role of God, the grand creator, preserver (and ultimate destroyer) of 
not just humanity but the universe itself.  In this tradition we do not have any thread of philosophical 
questions with respect to the unity of existence, duality from unity or even any epistemological questions as 
to what could be known or who it could be known by (the chicken and the egg question so to speak), we 
simply have a creation story in succinct form which lays out what was created, when, by whom in quite literal 
fashion - laying the groundwork for a moral and ethical framework which is just as unforgiving as it were, 
given its lack of philosophical foundations, despite the longstanding work done by the Greco-Roman 
philosophical tradition to facilitate these philosophical lines of questions. 

Genesis then is the first part of the Torah, the scripture of the Hebrews within which we find not only the 
famed story of the creation (two of them actually), but also the famed legend of the Adam and Eve in the 
Garden of Eden and their fall from grace via the temptations of the great snake, as well as the story in Exodus 
of the giving of the Ten Commandments to Moses by Yahweh after his people had been led out of tyrannical 
Egypt through various miracles performed by Yahweh on behalf of their "chosen" people, and many of the 
other legendary tales that have come to represent the mythos of the modern day Judeo-Christian (and again 
to a lesser extent Muslim) world.  It is in the Pentateuch where we find the historical and theological 
underpinnings of the Jewish faith, the philosophy of the ancient Hebrews as it were. 
The Nevi'im, or "Prophets", consists of eight books and cover the history of the Jewish people from the time 
Hebrews enter the land of Israel until the time of Babylonian captivity under the prophet Judah in the early 
6th century BCE.  Books of the Nevi'im include Joshua, Judges, Samuel I & II, Kings I & II, Isaiah, Jeremiah, and 
Ezekiel.  
The Ketuvim, or "writings", sometimes referred to by the Greek name Hagiographa, consists of eleven books 
which include the Book of Psalms, Proverbs, Job, Ecclesiastes, Daniela and Chronicles among others.  Two of 
these books are the only ones were that have significant portions written in Aramaic rather than Hebrew, 
and some of the books are in poetic form rather than prose which is standard for the rest of the Torah.  The 
contents of the Ketuvim are considered to be later editions of the Torah and although not as authoritative as 
the "teachings" are nonetheless considered instructive and crucial to understanding Hebrew philosophy (the 
Jewish faith) and were therefore canonized along with the contents of the Nevi'im and Books of Moses.
With respect to the underlying history and evolution of the Torah as a written textual, and associated oral, 
tradition of the ancient Hebrews, scholars best guess for the actual compilation of the (earliest) material is, at 
the earliest, in the middle of the first millennium BCE.  Given the historical material in these works, and there 
is much historical material that can be corroborated with other ancient authors, our best guess as to when 
Moses actually lived, as the historical figure rather than the author, is at least a thousand years or so before 
the earliest parts of the Torah was compiled, leaving plenty of room for doubt and question as to whether or 
not a) Moses was the author of the Books attributed to him, or b) what the actual socio-political factors were 
that drove its adoption and prevalence among the ancient Hebrews for a thousand years after Moses died 
and handed over the care for the Jewish people (and state) to his successor Joshua.  
Ancient oral traditions were strong no doubt, but how much was lost or transformed within these 1000 years 
before the Old Testament was officially compiled and transcribed by the Men of the Great Council in the 5th 
century BCE and the centuries thereafter?  This oral tradition problem, or prophetic separation if we may coin 
a term, existed in almost all religious systems, at least the ones that are most commonly practiced today.  
Even the Qurʾān was not written down by Muḥammad himself, implying that even if we leave aside the 
problems of language and socio-political interpretation of the text, we're still left with some level of 
prophetic separation, the time period and possible miscommunication of ideas between what the prophet 
actually said, or communicated, and what was actually written down, or transcribed.  This notion of 
prophetic separation is reflected in the Islamic tradition by for example slightly different versions of the 
Qurʾān that have persisted down to present day.
As far as authorship goes for the Pentateuch itself, it is very much debated by modern scholars and 
theologians as to whether or not it can be established that Moses was in fact the true author.  Having said 
that it is clear that the five books attributed to Moses provide a consistent and cohesive narrative however 
and that would seem to indicate that there was a single author or editor who compiled at least these 5 
books.  Whether or not this was actually Moses is a different question entirely of course.  There are however 
many references in the Books of Moses themselves, as well as throughout the rest of the Old Testament (and 
even in the New Testament), that indicate that Moses is in fact the author in question, but identifying 
whether or not this individual was in fact the historical Moses or some other later individual who later wrote 
down the narrative remains a matter of speculation.  The tradition of the compilation of ancient material 
from a long standing oral tradition associated with an historical figure from many generations prior to 
authorship is of course a common practice in antiquity - the Vyasa of the Vedic tradition or Zarathustra of the 
Avestan lore, and even Orpheus being from the Greek tradition being prime examples.  
The core of the Jewish faith and tradition however rests in the Torah, and from the Jewish vantage point its 
author, at least the first five books, is Moses.  The Moses to whom Yahweh (Elohim) revealed his message to 
directly, which was captured in the Torah, in both written and oral form, and passed down through the ages 
via the Rabbinic scholars and teachers into present day.  According to the Jewish tradition, the contents of 
the Torah were "revealed" to Moses by Yahweh himself, in the very same way the Zoroastrian, Christian and 
Islamic faiths had at their core the belief that their scripture was revealed by the one true God of their 
respective faiths through their respective prophets - Zarathustra, Jesus and Muḥammad respectively .  
The Jewish tradition, referred to in antiquity as the religion of the "Hebrews", was born out of the eastern 
Mediterranean and therefore not surprisingly shows marked Sumer-Babylonian influence, influence that has 
now been well documented by modern scholarship.  This influence can be seen most prominently in the 
mythology and historical narrative laid out in Genesis ("in the beginning"), where the stories of creation and 
fall from grace from the garden of Eden bear striking similarities to motifs and mythological narratives that 
we know were commonplace in the Assyrian/Babylonian civilization that lay just to the East.  The story of the 
Noah and the Great Flood and the preservation of mankind from the wrath of God also in Genesis can also be 
found in the mythos of the Near East within the great Epic of Gilgamesh.  
The Sumer-Babylonian/Assyrian civilization from which these stories clearly originated, or at least from which 
we have the earliest evidence of their existence, preceded the compilation of the theo-philosophical tradition 
of the Hebrews by some centuries, millennia even, but at the same time provides evidence for the cultural 
milieu within which Moses the prophet lived and transcribed the ancient Hebrew narrative in what has come 
down to us as the Pentateuch, surviving to this day as one of the great cultural heritages of the West in the 
canon of the not just the Hebrew Bible but the Christian Bible as well as the Old Testament, incorporating 
much if not all of the ancient Hebrew mythos. 
So with the Jewish monotheistic tradition then, we see some outside influences on the scripture itself from 
Sumer-Babylonian and other Canaanite mythos, but the faith, as with all of the Abrahamic traditions, is 
centered around the belief in the direct revelation of the Word of God to its prophet, Moses, and the 
subsequent transmission and codification of this revelation to its people.  But what should not be lost, and is 
true most certainly for Christianity and Islam as well, is that the canonization and standardization of the faith 
and its practices down through the centuries after the passing of its prophet, was intended to unite its 
people, and somewhat distinctly for the Jews, to legitimize and establish their ancestral homeland in Israel.
But with Moses and Judaism, as was the case in each of these other ancient monotheistic traditions, the 
prophet taught the message of the one true God to students and followers, their people, and then 
generations after these teachings were transcribed from the oral tradition into written form in order to unite 
its people, each revealed tradition transcribed in the language that was prevalent in the civilizations within 
which the religions flourished.  For the ancient Jews, it was Hebrew, for the Zoroastrians it was Old Avestan, 
for the Indo-Aryans it was Vedic Sanskrit and for the Christians it was Greek and then Latin, and for the 
Muslims it was Arabic.  The language within which each of these ancient religious frameworks was 
documented reflected and mirrored the civilization within which they took root, each civilization unique in its 
own way and this uniqueness was reflected in the prevalent language and form of writing which was most 
commonplace, for language and civilization evolved together no doubt.